% Visit to Wisconsin Relatives and Our Move to Elk Point
% Ransom Marion Tone
% ~1935

Back from a trip of several months duration during which time we had visited, it seemed, most of our relatives, we were now nearing our journey's end. We would soon be in the new home father was preparing for us in our absence. La Crosse, Merrill, Wausau, Ripon, Osh Kosh, Beliot, Madison,--these were some of the places I would always remember, some with pleasure, but some otherwise.

At Merrill, we visited our great Uncle Will Foster, who was almost Ripley in his relation to us, being mother's uncle and father's brother-in law. Uncle Will was doubly our uncle. He was Grandmother Foster Tone's brother and he was father's sister, Emily Tone's husband. There were five noisy children of about our ages. We had great times there. One late evening the ladies and girls and their neighbor friends went swimming in the river. We were excited about going but sorely disappointed when told we could not accompany the ladies because some of the girls had no bathing suits. An hour later they returned frightened half out of their wits by a man who appeared on a long sand bar and laughed at them, which served them right. Uncle Will worked for the Electric Company and lorded it over the men in the street car barn. They had fine wires strung along the floor at the car barn entrance. It was lightly charged to keep the kids out. I thought it a waste of time by the big men who put it there and said so. Uncle Will half-way agreed.

We picked wintergreen and luscuous [sic] timber rasberries [sic] far back in the woods, ever watchful for bear and also fearful of getting separated from the others and getting lost. The river was crammed with logs and there were prospects of a big gorge. I wanted to walk on the logs as the men did and help break up the jam, but it was thought best otherwise.

At Wausau there was Uncle Foster and Great-Grandmother Foster, once a famed contralto, internationally known, but now very old. Much was still being said about her great successes.

At Beloit we had visited a cross old lady, my Great-aunt Cordelia Tone, daughter of the great James Manahan Tone who had let us down. A lecturer of Christian Science she was a majestically large lady who ruled the stone establishment and had a great deal of money. There were other relatives there of hers and ours, my Great-aunt Mary and Great-uncle Ransom, Theda and her daughter, Hope, and others from Des Moines. We boys were not allowed to enter the enormous stone stable nor even to throw stones in the spacious back yard. Each afternoon Uncle Ransom took us across the town and to the river bridge from which we watched dozens of larger boys swimming down below. Dressed alike, even to the large blue bow ties and bright, silver buckles on our oxfords, we boys were required to keep ourselves spotlessly clean. We four ate in silence in a corner of the spacious dining room. We were seldom among the older folks. Mother said to show them we could be as silent as any of them and we obeyed her implicitly but with pent up thoughts. It required only an occasional look from mother to keep us that way. I wondered why we stayed so long and if we were really welcome, and was overjoyed when it was announced we had heard from father and were going to start for Elk Point and our new home.

Traveled and quite grown up. That's how we felt, my three brothers and I. Mother felt that way, too. I was sure she felt her young charm more than a little, for in addition to being the mother of us four men she passed admirably as our sister. More than that mother was very pretty. Many a lady and also gentleman with pattings on our heads and a smile for mother remarked about the great resemblance among us four boys and our sister, too.

"They are my sons," Mother would say, a little smile playing around her red lips, her soft brown eyes upturned then moving caressingly over us. Then there was astonishment on the face of the inquisitor and on the faces of all within earshot. For mother was only a girl, a slender willowy girl much too young to own four such husky boys. You would have thought we might be too much for her but she was the picture of happiness.

Today mother was especially happy. I heard her humming as she slicked us up for leaving the dusty railroad couch which had been ours much too long. We were tired of the red plush cushions, the place at the window, and the shiny buttons on the conductor's coat. Besides father would be there to welcome us, our father who was our chiefest God and whom we had not seen for several months.

The train crashed to a halt, jerked and settled back into itself.

"Elk Point," That's what we said, all of us. In line and led by Esla, the oldest, we were shepherded by mother from the coach, she bringing up the rear.

"Take care, boys. Go slow." She cautioned. "Oh, there's papa!" and she hurried, shoving us along down the steps and onto the high plank platform. Yes, it was he alright and soon he had us all in his arms. I didn't feel timid any longer about meeting him.

A nod from Father assured Esla and me and we climbed into the Merchant's Hotel bus. Old rheumatic Bill, or "Flannel shoes" as we learned to call him took his high place in the driver's high seat and rolling and bouncing the coach plunged to main street and down it and was backed up to the hotel's wide plank walk. Built on a corner the hotel seemed an enormous structure for so small a town. Inside, it's room seemed small. Here we were to live for two weeks until our home was completed. In return for our promise not to complain anymore about the food and not to speak again of the maid's ironing the table napkins without washing them, father said he'd hurry up the carpenters but I concluded long before we left the hotel that he had gone away on the train and forgotten to scold the men.

After the tobacco stains had been removed from the floors and mopboards, we moved into our new home. Like colts in new pasture we boys ran about the place, climbing the boxelders, battling our way through dense plum thickets. There was much to be done to put the place in shape and father was busy every minute when at home.

We were on the extreme south west corner of town, bounded on the west by a far reaching slough of green and densely grown high sunflowers and hemp, spotted with clumps of large willows and some enormous cottonwoods. This unfenced, wild tangle of weedy pastureland extended to the Missouri, then about three miles distant. Sumac, grapes, elderberries, and thickets of dogwood, plum and ash grew in profusion. Here was a wilderness fit for any boys and we took charge of it's sand hills, it's trees, it's flowers, and birds. In it's low swales, which flooded each year we swam and sailed our rafts and crude boats and skated in winters. On its knolls we built our camps and forts. Through its brush and weeds we charged the enemy, our unfinished battles continuing from day to day.

In the early fall Elk Point was a busy place in contrast to Beloit. To me the regular town activities seemed rushing. Everyone was busy and going about in pell mell fashion under the town's great parasol of spreading boxelders and maples which in places interlaced above the shadowy streets. I remember well the board sidewalks, the ash crossings, the half eaten hitching posts, and rails and I remember the side streets made atrociously smelly by these hitching places.

When Jesse James and his gang hitched their horses in front of the saloon which stood where Union Counties Court House now stands on the main street of Elk Point that village was pretty much the same as when we arrived to make it our home. It was 1889 and September. We had come to Elk Point to live so father could get home oftener, as Elk Point was the junction of the west, north and east branches of the Sioux City and Dakota Division of the Chicago, Milwaukee, and St. Paul Railroad for whom he worked. He was now foreman and there was talk of a big promotion for him. If it failed to materialize he was certainly going to Topeka, Kansas to an even better job. Just why father bought lots in the extreme opposite corner of town from the depot I never knew. It was right smart of a walk for me and my brothers to go to the train to meet dad after mother had read us his letter saying he would arrive Saturday on number 32 or number 4 which ever train it was and we were supposed to know about. Ahold of father's finger I would march by his side as fast as my legs could carry me over the sounding board walks keeping up the best I could with him and the Valise he carried in his other hand. I was there at the station to meet him, never failing, and though he never said it, he wanted me to be there. Dads' arrival home was an occasion with us and in preparation for it every task was performed against the hour of his coming. After supper my brothers and I generally wrestled him, piling on top of him four deep and sometimes making it pretty tough for him. My mother, whose entire world revolved about him, had perhaps unconsciously instilled a certain amount of worship in our minds, too. We thought he was about perfect and were very proud of him.

Father was a religious man having been converted and wherever he went he took an active part in religious services. In his valise was a well worn bible which he always carried with him. I had been told he presented to the church at Beloit a Bible fully as large as the one on the pulpit of our Methodist church at Elk Point. On Sunday we all attended church. Father would run any of the meetings but could not sing. He taught us to give to the church and gave us coins to put in the collection. One tenth he did not consider enough to give. I believe he did not deviate from the conviction as long as he lived.

Through fifty telescopic years I see Elk Points main street as it was then to me, it's dusty, cloddy, poorly crossinged thoroughfare, it's double handled town pump located at the center of the cross roads and enclosed by plank rails. The town pump was our goal when we played Run Sheep Run, Throw the Stick, or Blank-a-lilo of evenings. (With the coming of the curfew we chose a remoter goal). It was here we drank to cool off and washed the dust from our hot faces. What times we had! Even the town Marshall joined in the games and boys and young men came in from the country for the fun. Of evenings men and boys raced on main street..Roy and I stood at the top in our class and we were mighty proud of it. 

At the end of main street, unpainted, long in disrepair, leaning and warped stood Charley Mitchell's blacksmith shop. It stood alone a little back from the street at the end of a beaten path which grew narrower each year. Discarded vehicles and rusting old iron of all shapes and sizes crowded in upon it and it's broad, open doorway. Everything here was in great confusion and as dirty as it was old and smelling to the sky. The roof had leaked in places for years. Old Charley's shop had grown old with him, yet like him was still standing and carrying on. Like him it was a little stooped, a little worn, a little grey and tired, but just like him the fire of it's forge still glowed and it's big bellows still responded in guttural blasts when called into action. His long, grey hair tied with a string, his discolored beard, his heavy leather apron in shreds, I can see him now as then. In the blacksmith shop the forge is generally the centre of attraction. Not so here. He was. Tall, slow, stooped, powerful, his voice low and heavy, his eyes large and convincing, his every move commanded attention. His heavy laugh like the words he spoke seemed to come from down deep behind the great leather apron. His broad hands you could believe had not been clean in forty years; no cleaner than his language which was vile enough. Like the mingled smells, atrocious, yet agreeable, his stories, vulgar laughter, and profanity kept him an audience and often of the town's best. Be times, he'd smoke a few drags from a dark, large-bowled pipe he kept on a brick protruding from the forges' chimney. He lighted the pipe from a stick dipped into the forge or from a hot iron seized quickly and held dangerously before him with heavy tongs.

Old Charley was fond of children. We were always welcome even when older folks stood leaning in front of the forge, or risked sitting down, to hear what was being said. Practical jokes were not uncommon. Sometimes when he met us at the store or on the street he would inquire where we were going. Told we were getting ready to go swimming out at the Sioux, he would smile approvingly. Then when some little distance from us he would turn and say very seriously, "When you get hitched up, drive around and stop in front of the shop." Once, after years of knowing better, at his request we drove around and stopped in front of the shop just to see what old Charlie would say. He was surprised and pleased and came out his hands on his hips and laughed uproariously with us. It was a good joke. But he knew we were on to him and let it go as it was.

Old Charlie just naturally stopped everything but breathing when Mrs. Mitchell died. There was never any more boisterous talk, or hearty hailing of his friends, or laughter. He was dead on his feet til the day he died in a fit of over intoxication, alone by his forge.

To the east and at the opposite end of this main street block stood the H.H. Rowe hardware store which also faced the north. It was then the only other edifice in the half block except a small rental house. Old Henry Rowe was a Civil War veteran. He wore boots shined always with stove polish and a faded blue army coat. He strutted a little and had an almost idiotic chortle, yet was sharp as tacks. It was said he had inherited a lot of money and still had it and more, too. Once I listened while Old Henry demonstrated and sold a new type of all metal washboard. I found it difficult to suppress a laugh when the washboard selected because of its greater number of holes, brought fifteen cents more than its contemporary. Another time I heard him say in his testimony at prayer meeting, which I attended regularly then, that in his judgement it was impossible for any merchant to be one hundred per cent honest and succeed. I often pondered his statement and always to his disadvantage as I sat in his Sunday School Class. Even now I wonder about that. One Christmas day he gave me and each of the others of his Sunday School Class a book which I still have.
