# 1942^[Gini Norgard transcribed this and left out a lot of the financial notes and some of the buying and selling of animals.]

### Feb

20 Plyllis and I started for Hollywood along with Mr. & Mrs. Dunlalp who will take us as far as Sacramento.

*Yes, they left at 4:45 a.m. Dunlap stayed here. Dad didn’t sleep so he must be tired tonight sitting up on the bus. Looked like rain, so shoveled sawdust and carried wood. Ran my face for 2 sacks barley and part of a sack of pig feed at Rasmussens.*^[If written in Italics then Slim (Flo) wrote the entry.]

21 *Eve lamb died today very suddenly.*

22 *Other lamb also the grey & white kitten died today. Set red hen in rabbit house.*

23 *Pres. Roosevelt’s report to nation. First submarine attack on Pacific Coast tonight at Santa Barbara.*

24 *Went to Home Nursing Class & broke Seena Hick’s fever Thermometer, darn it.*

25 *Looks as if the folks ran into some excitement in L.A. “unidentified Aircraft” last night, anti-aircraft guns firing, but they don’t seem to understand just what the aircraft were. Citizens of L.A. are indignant because Knox calls it a false alarm. The Twin Oaks man looked at brown goat, but no sale.*

28 *Bo’t table. Sold brown goat $3.00.*

### March

1 *Out to Comptons and got all the fender dents straightened out.*

3 *New sawdust guys going to use barn & fill up the hole.*

5 *Tony says come L.A. Guess I will. Domy will do chores and Grandma will stay at Pitneys and Salem.*

8 Flo to L.A. 

11 Uncle Cal died.

15 We visited Foutches Hollywood.

16 Clearing ½ A. got poison oak.

17 Started home. Stayed over night at Howells and at Shasta.

19 Arr. home 7 p.m. New renter in North apt. Sinclairs moved out of cottage. Heifer calf (Dallis cow) born Mch. 16.

21 Harrises moving to Forest G. New renter taking white cottage. Flo to Eugene. Poison oak pretty good.

23 Flo to Dalles to bring home cow and calf & Grandma from Salem.

24 Poison oak very bad. Still in bed. Pump change must be made soon.

29 Tomato seed planted today.

26 Sold pig Mrs. Pitney $6.00 pd.

### April

5 Gas 10 gal $2.00. Gas 5 gal $1.00. Rep tire $2.00 pd. Oil change .75 Welding 1.15

7 Car grease & oil chg $3.70 pd

13 Flo to Salem with Domy.

23 *Nell has gone to Great Falls for another shot of serum. Doesn’t look good.*

24 Slim is counting chicks at 45¢ per hr. for Rush. Thinks it’s great because it’s a new kind of work for her. Raining like hail. Just as well, I can’t walk anyway.

25 Pat finished the Kalsoming. Florence went to the doctor. Rich reports he killed a 36’ rattler on the half acre and he and Mary ate the snake. Smith (East Apt) has disappeared leaving his wife broke and the rent unpaid.

27 Flo to Dallas with Domy.

The Smiths moved out.

### May

2 *Bo't used washing machine from Fries Hardware $19.00.*

22 We went to Eugene so Slim could order new glasses and get things needed for her trip to L.A. along with Mrs. Dunlap as far as Frisco.

23 Florence and Mrs. D. left at 5 this morning leaving their sandwiches behind. The house seems pretty empty with Slim gone. Maybe it’s all right.

24 Richard arrived from L.A. at 10 this morning alone in his Pontiac Coupe.

25 *Richie in Junction City.*

27 Hee-haw has been here constantly every day this week. Pat says he’s here to be with Rich but I notice he is with Pat and not Rick. I here record my declaration to throw him out as often and as hard as needed after school closes.

28 To Eugene with Rich to get pump repairs. Pat’s singular friends, male and female still here almost constantly. Commencement today. I hope this girl goes home to the country then - and I know Jacobson will rarely appears after today.

29 Pat and Rich are packing canned jam, fruits and meats for him to take back with him. Pat soon goes to Banks. Going to be plenty lonesome here. Letter from Slim, says she’s going on to Los Angeles. Grandma is in tears, has been writing letters. Poor old grandma. I dreamed she got lost looking for the kittens and all were looking for her but couldn’t find her. She had been out in the cold for hours. Probably because she did get lost again here in the house. The kids are thought-less of her. She wants so to be noticed. R. Pitney came to examine the trans. We shall experiment with June grafting of walnuts. Our first grafts (12) were put on May 4th.

30 Rich left for L.A. tonight at 8. Said he’d be there in 24 hours.

31 Pat gone to the show. Grandma pretty nervous and lonely when left alone even for a short time.

### June

1 *Richie home.*

7 Phyllis gone to Banks for 5 wks leaves grandma and me alone.

10 Can’t walk but guess I must.

11 Mrs. Dony gave up – couldn’t milk the cow.

11 *Nell is very much worse. The last shot of serum was all wrong.*

12 Mrs. Hustin gave up, couldn’t manage the new cow. It’s about all I can do to get the chores done. Emil may take the cow for a few weeks. It better be so. 3 wks Florence has been gone. Still cold and cloudy. Rain nearly every day.

13 Can’t walk any more now. Will Leech is taking care of the chores. My burns are giving me ----. Got both hands burned putting out fire in furnace hopper. Didn’t know furnace was stopped up. Close call and have I got white spots on my hands? And do they hurt? No sleep till after 4 this morning. The leg sore is a heller, bet I’ll get a trip to the hospital. Sending to Rapid Cy for the wheel chair.

Grandma is more patient than I, though I couldn’t call her patient. She is so selfish thinks and talks only of herself, and her habits are repulsive. She swears like the hell and I like to hear her. Poor old Grandma. I hope I never hurt her feelings any more. A vain hope. Each of us must carry some little load or admit what we must not admit.

14 Sunday – cold and cloudy. Grandma had a bad night, too. Poor, stubborn, old Grandma. She is sore at me and should be. 

Mrs. Ahrend, Mrs. Westin, Bill Leech and Lavon – among them they will take care of all but Grandma. She can starve and be damned to her. The selfish old pig. I hope her nine hotcakes and two hot water bottles keep her alive till lunch time.

Never had such pains before in the thigh. Hope the wheel chair comes through quickly. I loathe this bed and this room and this cold, gloomy country and so many other things.

Glenn H. here, said Ed had gone to Calif. Agreed to take grandma until we are prepared for her at Los Angeles.

15 Grandma has no threaded needles and has lost her shears and her temper. I’m staying right here. Let her look for them. It’s hard enough getting her meals. I can’t run after her anymore.

Rain and cold, the damn fire gone out and grandma crying. If she would only stoke the fire as she does herself. This is a hell of a country. The middle of June and may snow any minute.

16 Bill is still looking after the chores and Levon helping. Hope I’ll be able to get around some by the end of the week. Florence is sure now she will stay at Los Angeles. Annie’s kittens in 60 days.

20 Still cold and cloudy. Had to keep fire today and every day for Grandma.

21 Jack & Amy came. First time I have seen Jack in four months.

Mrs. Leech has a rat locked in a rabbit hutch but hasn’t the courage to try to kill it. I can’t walk that far to help her.

Still cold Grandma sits by the oven all day long.

22 A warm day. Heavy clouds tonight and hot. Grandma still wearing 2 sweaters says she is comfortable. Nice cards from Peggy and Phyllis. I thought Father’s Day was forgotten years ago.

23 Cloudy but no rain. Grandma has moved her sewing table back to the kitchen. She is mad at the world today.

We start even Jan 1st ’43 if we can pay $65.00 per month until Jan.

24 Steady rain all night cold today. I got around too much yesterday, got to stay on this bed for a while. Pat is all upset over our renting the place. Girls like Grandmas see things only as they affect them, personally. Florence doesn’t know whether she’s coming or going.

2 a.m. Too wide awake to sleep now. Grandma just woke me for aspirin, said the bottoms of her feet hurt her, and besides she had a sliver in her finger. But I couldn’t locate the sliver. Poor old Grandma she is so helpless, needs some one with her every hour.

Steady rain and warmer. Never before saw anything like it. Eight bad weather months. Hell of a country.

27 Left for Los Angeles. Stayed 10 p.m. to 3 a.m. at Dinsmore. Pump repair 11.40.

28 Drove to Ceres stayed all night. 3 tire changes – 2 tubes gone.

29 Another tire flat. Radiator stopped up. Couldn’t drive over 30 mi pr. Hr. Finally found a tube $5.50. It blew out. Didn’t pay for it. Got another about 80 miles out. 2.00

30 Arrived Tujunga 2:45 a.m. 10517 Pinyon Ave, Tujunga.

### July 

1 No mistake getting Florence down here. She is happier and looks more than ten year’s younger.

3 Moved to 3908 Mayfield Av. On hand $104.00

6 Pr shoes 6.40

Loaned to Mary to complete car Pmt 15.00 Pd on bills Junction City $35.00.

To Flo for Sundry Exp 35.00.

Country Gentleman writes that my poem “The Fence Corner” is too good to publish, that’s what I thought, too.

8 Made deal with Home Builder’s Lumber Co. yesterday. Will start building on Sunland Blvd when permit from Van Nuys office is allowed. Hot again today. Rich getting his blue prints today – maybe. Florence’s birth certificate hasn’t come and is she fidgety?

10 Mom is happy today, but scared. She went to Lockheed thinks there may be a stiff exam waiting her. The birth Certificate bottleneck has been removed.

All airplane workers to receive an increase in pay. 

Monday. Tooth out today. Didn’t hurt.

13? Thurs 3 p.m. for another extraction. $2.00 pd.

Last Sat Flo & I called on Albert, Alice and Nell Nichols.

16 Two more teeth out – feel fine, almost. Pd $4.00.

Pay back to Rich $5.00. pd 1.00 pd 4.00

Glenn says we must park Grandma elsewhere. She is changeable.

18 3 socks 1.00 3 ties 1.00 gas 2.00

19 Pd Rich 4.00 (Even now). Rich says he’s going eat during his vaction to get his flying hours. All agree it is the thing to do. The four of us went after peaches to can and a crate of oranges. Still pretty warm, though not nearly so warm of nights.

21 Cooler till today. Rec’d from Mary $15.00 makes us even.

22 Warmer. Rich got an OK from Van Nuys office must get the blue prints made tomorrow.

23 Working on blue prints today. Hottest night yet. Pat has returned from Banks to Junction City. All is well at home. Pat wants to go to Falls City convention for a week.

25 Blue Prints accepted but must have 4 of each. Glenn has decided to keep Grandma for the present, which stabilizes us a lot.

27 Richie’s birthday. Mom made him a large cake.

Mr. Black brought us home last night leaving our car at the garage. Would accept no pay, but asked us to call on his teacher wife in his absence. He goes into the army tomorrow if he passes the examination.

28 I’m alone today. Rich & Mary attending classes, Slim gone some where for the day.

#### [August]

August 1 Rich cutting poison oak. Tomorrow we start the forms. Suppose I’ll catch the PO right away.

2 Worked on foundation.

3 Ditches & forms. Caught posion oak again. Flo has it, too. Rich planning to join Marine Air Corps and not wait to be drafted.

4 Flo and Ihelped Rich write letters in connection with his application to Marine Air Corps. Certainly not a pleasant task but maybe it’s for the best. 

To Glendale to a show tonight Slim and I. To bed sometime ago but now I’m up. The kids will soon be home. I’ve got a peach of a tooth ache. Will have it pulled today, if I live through this night Gosh! It’s a -----.

8 Worked on foundation.

9 Worked on foundation. The old leg is objecting. What the hell good is a juy like me anyway.

10 Rich says he’s going to J. Cy. His vacation. Tomorrow is our 25th anniversary.

11 Send in my Selective Service Occupational Questionnaire today. Rich got his today, too. Doesn’t seem I’ve been married 25 yrs, but that’s what it is. And soon I’ll be grandpa. Even Pat is grown up. One doesn’t have to be a success to raise a grand family. They haven’t needed me for years.

13 Today I worked some on the cottage foundation forms but Slim & Daisy came to get me, as usual.

14 Rich can’t decide about going to Juction City. His 10 day vacation with pay begins the 24th.

15 Letter from Glenn says she wants Pat to stay. Changeable Glenn! Pat wants to though.

21 Roy’s birthday. Just wrote to Lydia. Today we decided not to buy the McBroom St. home. It’s a lot of house for the money also an A. of ground, but no one ever thinks he can control California bluffs. Maybe we’ll rent it. Rich starts tomorrow for Junction City, his vacation. He buys Mary two tires for use of her car. Don’t like his going up there, but must not say so.

22 Richie started for Junction City at eleven this morning. A hot day. Mary, mom and I went out looking for a house to rent. Tippy came home; was gone four days.

24 Nell reported failing fast. Didn’t even know Margie when she left for Calif and their their school work.

Pat writes that Grandma E. didn’t recognize Margie when she stopped off at Junction City. 

Still no word from Lockheed and Slim is impatient.

28 We have found ahouse to rent, shall move tomorrow or Monday (9843 McBroom St.).

Rich called by Uncle Sam to take the physical next Tues. Maybe the Lockheed request for his deferment will not be recognized. But he says it will take a year to qualify a new man for his job.

30 Moved to 9843 McBroom St. Roscoe.

31 Rich got back at 2 a.m.

### Sept

4 Rich classified IA

5 Richard joining Navy Naval Aviation Reserve Officers.

7 Labor Day. Everybody working, except postal and other government employees, bankers, etc. Albert, Alice, the girls and Nell spend Sunday with us. We talked over old times at Elk Point.

10 Rich still trying to get into Army Reserve Air Corps or Coast Guard Air Force. This probably is his last day. Could not get reservation on plane to Portland last night and could not get release from Army. Will probably join Navy Today.

The Howells are definitely leaving the ranch and I’ll probably have to go back to Junction City.

12 Clara H. to go to Junction City. Domy to take over there.

Rich to get _   _ release from Army today to try Army Air Corps. Passed Regular navy Eye Test 20-20. So maybe can pass Army test. Will find out Monday. He sure has ben moving fast and in all directions to keep out of the gravel agitators.

14 Having trouble with would be very officions desk girl at Army Recruiting office. Must get signature on release before Rich can take Reg. Army Air corps physical Exam. She wouldn’t deal with me. Now he has gone to see the wise little cat.

13 Today we sold to Hanson all building material water pipe and hose $100.00. He pd. $25.00 and will pay $75.00 in three weeks. We set out another tree pink and brought home some of the oak wood for the fireplace.

16 Rich taking Aircorps mental test this morning. Mom going to May’s Great Slack Sale to help push and shove. Aunt Clara to leave E.P. today enroute to Junction City. Tel. from Cris. Domy saying he can’t take the farm.

19 Russians reenforced at Stalingrad from Siberia, Pushing back the Huns on several fronts.

Rich setting out many trees on his ½ A.

20 It looks like Stalingrad is going to fall. The Huns are now entering some of her streets.

We’ve bought a trailer house a good one with all the built-ins. For only $50.00. Going to repaint it and may rent it or sell it.

Well I’ve been through the Haig clinic, had a pretty thorough Exam & cardiograph also x-rays. Tomorrow I’ll have some more dental work done to remove infections. May be able to get some sort of job later.

27 Now the Russians are giving ‘em hell. The Huns will fold up sooner than we thought. Not so the Nips.

Tomorrow Rich tires the eye examination again. He may make it. If not he will join the Navy. Mary staying over weekend with Mary Nichols.

Aunt Clara has been at Junction City a week arriving Sept 19th so now they are all right up there for a while.

Kaiser is building an airfreighter 150 tons, two others to be built, too.

28 To the dentist Earl Brady. Bad jaw ache from removal of some bone. $15.00 for this extraction and treatment. Also to see Dr. Haig today. Owe him $20.00.

29 Richard went back to Lockheed to work till end of wk. Got his army call today to appear Oct 8th. Slim and I went to a show in Glendale, Roxie Theatre. Home very tired.

30 I staid in bed till nearly noon. Flo is canning tomatoes. Rich & Mary trying to figure out to make a rumble seat for two in her car. If he can get the electric connection Rich will place the trailer house on his lot. Gasoline rationing survey forms out today.

### Oct 

1 To the dentist again today. Bad dry socket.

5 St. L. took 4th game and World Series today. I watched the game down in L.A. at the V. Park. To the dentist again today. Rich to be sworn into Navy tomorrow. Stalingrad still holding out. Brave people the Russians.

7 Rich now in the Navy, is to go to San Diego Monday.

8 Flo hired by Lockheed to begin Firday 9th at 4 p.m. guess we’ll move to Burbank. Flo is happy.

Peggy’s baby arrived yesterday (Richard J. Nelson).

9 The Howell’s want to fight. Pagan vs a Christian gentleman.

10 Rich and I working on trailer H. Pd by Rich – Paint, nails, wall board, tar $4.50.

11 Rich goes tomorrow, early.

12 We three took Rich in Mary’s car to the Navy Administration Bldg. At eight today and now he has gone on to San Diego. Mom and Mary are taking it pretty bravely.

I didn’t stay home today. It was too lonely with everybody gone.

13 Nor today. I got my application papers from the Magnolia office.

| Religions Thought
| Rural Newyorker

| Reader’s Digest Assn.
| Pleasantville N.Y.

| Writer’s Digest
| 22nd East 12th St.
| Cincinnati, Ohio

| Country Gentleman
| The Curtis Publishing Co.

| Independence Square
| Philadelphia, Penna.

| Sat Eve Post
| Same at C. Gentleman

| Ladies Home Journal
| Same Add.

| Davy Goat Journal
| Fairbury, Nebr.

Mary & Rich, 10517 Pinyon Ave, Tujunga, Calif.

Helen C.E. Myhre, Rt. 1, Rapid Cy

Mrs. Al Nilson, 610 Atoe St. C. Cy.

Ellery Hall, Al Howard, 739-19th E, Eugene

Mary McCreary 401 North Hayford St., Lansing, Mich.

Peg, Ft. Columbia, Chinook

Nell 529 Brooks

J. Hayes 200 S- 22nd St.

3908 Mayfield Ave, La Crescenta

### Oct 

24 Sunday – Nell passed away in her sleep this morning.

### Nov

4 Peggy’s little boy is reported improving.

Nov 9 Rich says he’s to be home tomorrow the 10th and has a 6 day vacation. Then he goes either to sea or to an air base.

Nov 10 Rich arrived 6 tonight. Doesn’t seem to be keen about the navy. I hope he is sent to an airbase, though I’d jump at a trip to sea myself.

Nov 14 We gave Rich a Bulova watch today.^[See Jul 17] Might not be able to reach him by Christmas in his new abode – wherever that may be.

Nov 16 Rich left this morning at 8 from Los Angeles.

### Dec

2 Gas rationing began last Monday.


# 1943

### [September]

Sep 13 Rec’d from Geo. [Minty] for Mother E. cash $10.00. Sent on to Clara.

### [January]

Jan 18 Recd. Clara’s telegram. Florence leaving for Junction City tonight at seven by bus.

Jan 27 Mom [Flo] got back tonight after stopping over to see Rich, still in the hospital at Marc Id. Bronchial Pneumonia and now a back-set. 
 Alice Nichols to be operated Monday. Albert laid up, too. It better end lucky or the Nichols girls will not have either parent long.

### [February]

Feb 1 Richie still in the hospital writes that he has lost a great deal of weight but claims he is feeling better though weak. May come home, but thinks not. If they’d only give him a chance to get on his feet again.

Feb 4 Rich not much better today but seems cheerful. If they’ll only give him a break.

Feb 6 Albert died this morning at 7:30. Alice to be told. She is safely through her operation.

Feb 11 Albert’s funeral, only Mary went, Florence had such a cold.

Feb 13 Richie still in the hospital at Marc Island.

Feb 19 Richie is still in the hospital at Mare Island.

Feb 27 This is EA.’s^[Esla Alfred-Ransom’s brother] birthday. It is fourteen years since I wrote him a birthday letter.

Richie is back with Co. 7 at Tiburon after eight weeks in the hospital.

### [March]

Mar 11 Slim’s birthday. Richie arrived home at noon today – 6 days leave.

Mar 16 Richie left this morning at 6, going back to Tiburon, was here only 4 days.

Mar 17 Sent “Ring From The Lost Leadora” to Writer’s contest today.

Mar 21 Dinner at Nichol’s met Nancy Eslick. Slim and I took her to Tujunga & Glendale then we went to a show in Vermont.

Mar 28 Planted six grape vines out on the lot. 3 Muscat, 1 Concord, 1 Thompson’s seedless and 1 red Malaga. Total $2.25

### [April]

Apr 12 Richard has gone or is to go to Alaska according to his letter received today.

Apr 19 Rich home today 4 p.m. to 6:30 a.m. Tues.

Apr 28 Rich home at 1:30 p.m.

Apr 29 Left at 1:10 a.m.

### [May]

May 9 Rich to leave Tuesday for New Guinea.

May 11 Rec’d word today of death Apl 2nd of Uncle Will at Camrose.

| May 19 Rich’s address changed to: 
| 3rd Echalon, Cub Three
| c/o Fleet Post Office
| San Francisco.

Looks like he sailed Wednesday the 19th at 12:30 p.m.

May 23 I have been going over Richie’s papers, letters and other things and putting them in order. He is probably a long way on the route to New Guinea.

### [June]

Jun 5 Richard’s car stolen

Jun 8 Richard’s car found

Jun 12 Picnic tomorrow with Alice Nichols and Mary enroute to --- to get Richie’s car. 40 mi.

Jun 13 Got new forms from Lockheed Hollywood Blvd. offices, but no encouragement.

Jun 14 Applied at Hardman Co. They were hiring only younger men.

Jun 15 Applied at B & D Co. They wanted only experienced, younger tool makers.

Jun 16 Went to U.S.E.S. got Availability certificate and Identification card and Introductory card to Western Air Lines – for interview 17th.
Recd card from navy advising of Richard’s arrival at destination.

Jun 17 Applied at Western Airlines

Jun 19 --(?) took swing shift without physical report.

Jun 20 Swg. Shift.

Jun 21 Swg. shift. Sworn in by Lt. Crosby. 

Jun 22 Swg. shift.

Jun 23 My last shift. Released at 12: p.m. Wed.

Jun 24 Stayed home – leg not so badly hurt, but I won’t be getting around much for a week. Can find another job.

### [July]

Jul 17 Richard’s watch $55.69. Dep $15.00. Bal in 2 wks $40.69

Jul 27 Bal. on Rich’s watch $40.00 is due 

July 31.

Richard’s birthday. He is 21 today. I guess he is equal to driving his 50-ton barge.

### [August]

Aug 2 Pd on Richie’s watch 15.00 Leaves bal 25.00. Pd to MWard Co 5.50. Bal $20.00?

Aug 11 Pd. Bal. on Riche’s watch $25.69. Sending the watch today.

Aug 12 Sent the watch today.

Aug 16 Today I applied at Menasco Mfg Co. not successful. Took physical at Lockheed. Did not pass but they consented to another try. Said there were no jobs not requiring workers to stand at least 2/3 of the time.

Aug 17 Went back to Lockheed for repeats on blood pressure test. Had gone up more – to 205, but that is not my true pressure. It’s only because I was so tired. A week’s rest and I’m O.K. again.

Aug 23 Mary in U.S.O. work.

### [September]

Sep 13 sent grandma E. for Geo. 10.00

Sep 15 Peg sent 8.00 to apply on Richard’s watch.

Sep 20 Letter from Rich, now in aviation.

Sep 23 Mary & I had photos taken today at Marguina’s. Slim’s cold so bad she couldn’t go.

Sep 26 Letter from Rich – Transferred. Don’t know where he is now.

| Field Overhaul B 3 Navy 140
| San Francisco c/o Postmaster

### [October]

Oct 4 Pd bal. on Mary’s watch $35.00

Oct 17 Mary has gone to Olancha by bus to take flying lesson.

Oct 19 Sent Richie’s Christmas box today.

Oct 24 Mary left at 8 this morning for Olancha for flying lesson

Jack,^[Ransom's younger brother] now CB.CPO^[Chief Petty Officer] waked us up at 10:30. He is enroute to Australia or elsewhere in s. Pacific. Looks pretty spiffy in his officer’s uniform and is in good health. We took him around some but his bus left at 6:15.

Oct 28 Jack sent us farewell card from San Francisco.

### [November]

Nov 14 Mary to Olancha for flying lesson.

Nov 21 Sunday. Mary had to serve all p.m. at the U.S.O.

Nov 22 Mary’s car stolen today between 12:30 and 12:45.

I applied for job at US Emp. Offices.

Coppers came about Mary’s car. Thief must have got excited. He wrecked it two blocks from here.

Nov 23 Pontiac impounded at Mullens, 6300 Sunset. Spent all day getting released from stupid police officials, detective department, garage, etc. Going to cost about $35.00 repairing.

Nov 28 Mary is working at double time $2.32 pr. hr. it being her 7th day. Thinks she may work every other Sunday hereafter. 

### [December]

Dec 2 Pd. Repair’s Mary’s car: Steering gear & rods, Wheel & axle straighten, Spg. New, Rub out fender, Labor $18.00, Tow $4.00, Keys .75. Total $46.00.

Dec 12 Mary is cranky again. Not enough sleep, or her eyes, or things happening at the plant.

Dec 13 We have 12 nephews in the service, one son, one brother.
Rec’d from Rich money order $75.00 to be applied onhis acreage and to cover cost of gifts sent for him.

Dec 26 We did not hear from Rich. His last letter of Dec 10, will have to be his Christmas letter.

Dec 28 Slim left at 9 p.m. by bus for Eugene. Grandma thought very ill. 

Dec 30 Letter from Clara says grandma improved. Peggy is coming to visit us.

# 1944

### [January]

Jan 2 No gas, no readio, no newspaper, no Slim. I didn’t get up till 4 pm.

I want so much to say the things I’ve nefver been able to and now know I cannot. I came so humbly feeling my way into this great life, learning to see and feel so much. I have given so little in return. Even my limited talents appear unused and undeveloped. One slow to see is often and wrongly thought slow to feel and appreciate. I feel now that I am just beginning to be able to understand a little about the most important things. We feel much, see little and live accordingly, judging and misjudging. We learn not by our errors, but by and in the measure of our reflecting on them. And we don'’ reflect as we should.

It takes courage to face the fact that Richie is forever gone far from me and I shall not see him again. But I need still more courage to face the truth that I have not given him better information and training inorder that he can meet better than I have the important things that strike a man hard early in life. Fortunate he has more fortitude than his father. 

Jan 3 Grandma better.

Jan 9 Dad taken sick today after ride to Sunland. He got too tired.

Jan 17 Dad and I have been reading over all of his writing.

Jan 24 Tony had a good sleep.

Jan 27 Started giving Tone treatments today (short wave treatments for coronary trouble).

Jan 28 *Dad feeling better.*

### [February]

Feb 2 *21 days since dad has taken sick.*

Feb 7 *Started on new medicine for Dad.*

Feb 8 *Dad feeling better.*

Feb 9 *Dad didn’t sleep ‘til daylight.*

Feb 16 *Heart specialist says for Dad to get up gradually then come to his office. Short wave burned out a tube and shot a fuse.*

Feb 18 *Dad dressed for the 1st time.*

### [April]

Apr 18 Richie’s letter shows signs of great homesickness.

Apr 30 Joe leaving *Who is Joe?*

### [May]

May 1 Joe back again 

*He doesn’t sound too happy that ‘Joe’ is around.*

May 16 Clara and grandma asked to leave and must find a new place. They are a pretty trying pair to handle.

May 19 Clara’s letter rescinding the earlier one rec’ed.

May 29 Rich’s experience in New Hebrides maybe Malekula.

### [June]

Jun 15 Rec’d from mother Tone a loaf of homemade graham bread. Brings back days of along while ago.

### [July]

Jul 6 Great Barnum and Baily Tent fire at circus at Hartford, Conn this p.m. 200 dead.

### [August]

Aug 27 Sunday and So. Dak. annual picnic. Slim, Alice and Ann went.

### [September]

Sep 20 Richie has been too long in the south seas. It is telling on him.. He may never be the same. Those Ids. [rivers?] and the heat and the rain do things to all who stay there long.
