% Summer Vacations with Grandfather Tone
% Ransom Marion Tone
% Date Unknown

Mother and we four boys spent several summer vacations on the ranch at Grandfather Tone's in Hand County. Grand-father had many cattle and sheep, also a large family of fourteen, eight of whom were at home. Uncle Will who was ten years my senior became my hero. To the exclusion of all others Uncle Will and I formed a two-way society and companionship that was of real affection and lasted many years. I did not admit it to mother nor to anyone else but Uncle Will was beyond a doubt first with me in all matters and although we didn't get around to starting the big horse ranch we planned to own I learned eagerly and with a little swagger some of the things a big rancher needs to know in order to hold his own and be a success in that field.

After the slow coming close of school and after considerable discussion of the event and waiting for the free pass we would get from the rail road company^[his father worked for the rail road] we would start on our long trip to Ree Heights. Each one of us carried a share of the luggage and Esla, oldest and a favorite of the grand-parents, was charged with the gifts for them. There were numerous good-byes over the fences as we left the neighborhood and sometimes neighbor boys would accompany us to the depot, down hearted because there was no big ranch for them to go to for a summer and no free pass to take them. We felt sorry for them of course, but all we could do under the circumstances was to describe again the big herds, wide, deep lake, rafts, saddle ponies, and some of the best adventures awaiting us. This we did with as little swagger as the occasion would allow.

We changed trains in the night at Woolsy and got off again at Miller, twelve miles before reaching Ree Heights, because passenger trains did not stop at such narrow spots along their way as Ree Heights. At Miller Uncle Will asleep in the spring wagon, awaited our arrival to take us with great pleasure and tender care the remaining fifteen miles to the ranch. Will drove the horses slowly talking to them between his short conversations and laughter with mother. At day break we would arrive at the ranch too sleepy to talk but too excited to sleep.

Grand-father's home the first summer we visited there consisted of two up-to-the- minute cave and sod structures. One entered the larger cave through a square hole by means of a perpendicular ladder. Wide earthen benches or banks all around three sides served as seats by day and springless beds by night. They were carved into the walls, or rather left there when the digging was done. In some places they had caved off making the beds irregular and narrower. The foul odors and bed bugs of this room chased me out immediately and only for meals and to escape rain, which seldom fell, did either Esla or I ever go down the ladder.

That first summer there was a great drought. Crops were burned out and lake beds dried. The men built many long troughs and drew water from the springs for the horses, cattle, and sheep. They worked in shifts, the girls helping, all working into the night while the stock fought over the water poured out to them.

Finally a great rain storm came and large hail stones fell killing nearly all of aunt Cora's turkeys and chickens, both young and old, and all of the birds for miles around. Code was heartbroken but pretended she did not care much. She took her gunny sacks and went out as was her regular custom, to gather buffalo chips. This was Aunt Code's chiefest occupation anyway when not caring for her chickens and turkeys or helping with the milking. She seemed always sad and sullen and unhappy and when teased would often snap back in defense, then retire from among the rest and "cry bucket fulls" and feel sorry for herself. I felt very sorry for her, especially after mother told them they must not treat her so. And Uncle Will did his best to cheer her. I could see that he cared deeply for her and sometimes after much trying, his coaxings would get from her a two syllable sort of laugh, but there was no smile. Uncle Will said she laughed best when hurt as when Old Doll the big mare kept on a picket line because she could not be caught otherwise, dragged her through a colony of cactus. Even then only fear of Grandpa's surgery upon his return from his trip with the mail which he made twice weekly persuaded her to let others help her. But the long thorns went so deeply into her knees that I thought only she could have stood having them pulled out. She sat on the ground and wept but did not cry out nor speak. Esla told me on the side that she'd have pulled them out herself if they'd left her alone.

Frank Devine a young homesteader neighbor with a black mustache, small boots, an appetite for whisky, and a local renown for his tap dancing wanted earnestly to marry Code and told her so many times that she hated him. She had ambitions to get away from the prairie and go to school and become a teacher. Which ambitions alas were never attained though she did later finish the seventh and eighth grades while living with us at Elk Point. If Devine waited for her to come back as some said he did he was disappointed for she escaped him by staying away- escaped him to marry a devil-on-wheels whom she loved and who by his selfishness and abuse broke her body, heart and mind. She died in a hospital for the insane.

Of mornings, after helping Uncle Ransom who although my uncle was a year younger than I, put his congress shoes on and going with him on Old Dan to see if the older boys had turned out the sheep--his with the others-- etc., we breakfasted on pancakes and pork.

Grandmother was a sick lady and getting worse every year and nothing was being done about it. She died young, forty-nine, I think, when Ransom her youngest was twelve. Thirteen of her fifteen children survived her. Grandfather's first wife, Nancy Coleman, had four children. Jane Foster, his second wife had eleven children of which the eighth died in infancy.

At Grandmother's request the men made a high swing of two very tall poles. It was put up near the kitchen door and each in his long awaited turn had his breath taking swing, all the others in turn running under him. To frighten the girls and Grandma, Uncle Will would get Uncle Al to stand in the swing and hold him and Esla and Me, each in order of his size on the other's shoulders. He would then whistle which was my signal to skin the cat and while I did this Esla and he did likewise all landing again as before. Al was too fat to do it. Meanwhile Grandma wailed and wrung her hands and swore at the boys from the kitchen door. For there was a kitchen then and folks no longer lived in the soddies.

Grandfather's mail route took him through a Russian settlement where there was an inland post office and where Grandfather stopped to feed Old Barney and Dick and eat his lunch. At this station the Russian lady without thought of soap nor even water alternately made bread and stoked the fire with prairie chips. But they did not ask us to eat with them. They seemed unfriendly and few words were exchanged. Sitting in the big spring seat of the wagon out in the sun Grandfather and I ate our baking powder biscuits and brown sugar while Barney and Dick ate their hay and grain from the back of the wagon. Grandpa had loaned his fine pocket knife to the Russian and while he was taking the ponies the borrower had slipped the knife into his pocket. I told Grandpa about it when he returned from the water and he thought for some time licking his lips but for some reason, which I thought I understood, he did not ask for the knife. The dark, long-haired Russian did not return to our wagon but at length we saw him far out in his field. Grandpa would ask for the knife next trip. Several times upon his return from the route I asked Grandpa if he got his knife but he always said he forgot to ask for it. In my inquisitive mind I conjured up all sorts of reasons for Grandfather's lack of action in the matter. But I never solved the mystery to my satisfaction.

It was fun to drive the oxen. Once we went for wood in the night. We went to the forest reserve and brought home large trees, all the oxen would haul. We got them because if we hadn't gotten them someone else would have, even if it was against the law.

Uncle Jim told us to catch pigeons which we did one night, and he killed forty for pigeon pie. The others he turned loose. Code was pretty angry because they killed too many. Grandpa often stood in his open air blacksmith shop working at his forge or mending harness. Sometimes he fed the pigeons and they would perch on his head and shoulders. He was fond of them and kind to them but not to anything else except Dick and Barney and not always to them.

Aunt Mabel, youngest of the girls, had lived some with another family in order to attend school and had ideas. I think she was precocious and her elocution was pretty good. She was buxom and loud and had good clothes and was going to be a school teacher.

Living was hard out there in Hand County. Back home and with a father like ours we were better off and more secure. Father sent his folks boxes and money each winter especially at Christmas time.

On our next visit we found them living in an oversized square house bought from discouraged neighbors and moved in on broad wheeled trucks which were still in the back yard. Many oxen and horses had been used in moving so large a building. There was little furniture in this house. We kids slept on the floor up stairs with the men. I always slept on Uncle Will's arm. His chewing tobacco breath was dreadful but what could be done about it? By this time I was chewing regularly anyway. Spear Head was the best but sometimes they had only Battle Ax. I could spit clear of the saddle and no one would ever see any discoloration of my lips as was so plain to see on Uncle Al. With my feet in the leather above the stirrups and a fair sized chew tucked away in my cheek I would ride pell mell out to the fields and across long stretches of prairie never once pulling leather^[definition: 'Pulling leather' means drawing in the reins to slow the horse down] yet not so confident as I appeared to be. I even worked up the courage to follow on Old Dan the ever appearing Indian trains as they crossed our county headed eastward. On their seasonal migration, Grandpa said, to Pipestone, Minn. I followed them at the safe distance of half a mile or so to see that they didn't shoot another of our sheep. Code was very friendly with many of these Indians. She was always trying to trade them out of their beads and moccasins. Once she traded them a poor, scabby, little but fat dog which had no friend but her, it being a tramp and a mongrel and "afraid even of the old turkey gobbler." *I suppose they ate him.*^[Italics mean added by Florence.]

Just what was kindness out there I could not tell. My super abundance of tender, loving kindness seemed at this stage to render me entirely unfit for any part in this naturally cruel and unkind picture. How strange it all seemed to me. Not like things at home. Old Shep the shaggy, black shepherd, brave enough to be known as the best dog in the country and true enough to own the deep affection of the whole family, "smart as a whip" they all said, was an example of what I mean. Shep lost the sight of his left eye. It was done during a flogging with the black snake he received at Grandfather's feet for his failure to understand orders he could not hear. For gentle, old Shep was deaf. He had just naturally grown deafer and deafer and now was stone deaf. And what had made him deaf: Only repeated twisting of his ears. And even now they would do that to him. And why did they twist his ears? Believe it or not it was to prove to visitors and over and over to themselves that he would not whine nor whimper no matter how much he was hurt. "When you get that much grit, young fetter," they said to me, "you will be a real man." I wondered if it were so, but pitied and admired Old Shep and defended him all I could even with kicks and blows which to my disappointment only added to the merriment and to the abuse of cowering unhappy Old Shep. Next day I tore out the tree iron crowbars used as roosts in one of Code's henhouses' a job I had assigned to myself some time before. *These iron bars must have been cruelly cold for the chickens to roost upon in the winter.*

After rain storms infrequent enough to render any kind of crops uncertain, the rolling prairie was green and beautiful. There were no fences except the corrals. Lakes and springs as fickle as the weather served as wells, and beautiful cactus flowers and Indian turnips were encouraged by the rains. Grandfathers enormous, low sheep sheds, large corrals, and stables stood on a hill side across a wide ravine to the west from the house which faced the lake to the north. Barefoot, her course straight, brown hair combed back and falling in strings about her face, Grandmother, wiping her hands in her not too clean gingham apron, would hail all hands from the back door step. Her sharp, high pitched, nasal voice cut the air somewhat like a whining bullet as she made herself heard at the barn, the shop and even in the fields. She was a kindly soul stinted by much at the beginning of life and robbed and deprived of much more later on. A heart like a ham but a disposition thoroughly ruined by adversity and self inflicted punishment due to circumstances ever which it would seem she had never had any control. Of course I did not know then that she had been abused and denied much in childhood but even at six or seven years a child may do much wild guessing and wondering. Certainly I knew that Grandmother was unhappy and that she had decided long since that there was no use and that she didn't care because there was none. How she would swear when angry or excited! I deplored her blasts of profanity, her sharp rebukes to all who answered as well as those who paid no attention to her remarks. It seemed to me the girls and Grandpa were kind to her by paying little or no attention to her at these times.

There were no fences nor bridges nor any graded roads. Open wells with windlasses or just rope and bucket provided house water most of the time but during the dry summer months only the rush-covered springs of the lake beds were dependable and our water had to be carried quite a long distance. Covered barrels on stone slats stood at the back door. Sometimes they were wrapped in burlap sacks, but this didn't seem to make the water any better. *Tell about the old buggy the kids wrecked.*^[Note in upper margin.]

Uncle Will and I caught and butchered a sheep. It was not hard to catch it in the shed. It trembled and was afraid as Will parted the wool on its neck preparatory to cutting its throat. After a time its bleating became more feeble and when the bleeding had almost stopped it fell to the ground. I shuddered and felt mighty wicked. Then we cut off its head which we threw out the window and hung up the sheep for skinning and cleaning. Grandfather gave us the dickens for killing the weather, and said we should have killed a lamb. For he would have to replace the weather when he settled with his partner in the fall. This scolding seemed all directed at me, but Uncle Will said it wasn't.

The fights among the bucks were fierce. From the saddle I would watch them with much interest and often with wonder. You would be surprised to see what a buck can do with his hard head- even to a bull if sufficiently aroused. To the west but near the big round pond lake we called it, were a number of dark granite boulders half the size of good sized shacks and resembling old and over settled hay stacks. One of the scrappiest of the bucks would always leap to safety on the highest of these boulders when too weary to fight longer. Up there he would rest between battles now and then hurtling down upon the pawing bull the most insulting low baas he could formulate without too much interference with his heavy breathing. Suddenly and without warning he would be upon the bull again catching him perchance off guard and ramming his ivory head broadside into the vulnerable spot he had been waiting for, the flank. With a roar of pain the infuriated bull would rush him charging again and again. But now the gleeful buck only baaed tantalizingly, backing away and eluding easily each onslaught. But if the bull slowed up or stopped for breath the buck was again upon him and with such force from his fifteen yard bee-line charge that the impact could be heard some distance and even the bull would seem stunned and appeared to rock sideways while the buck fairly bounced back to his feet from his mid air lunge. From the pony I enjoyed these earnest battles. Here was a sporty fight which gave me no distress for I was partial to neither side and when at last the bull all the while watching his adversary, would slowly back away and withdraw to join his own kind amid the jeering ridiculing baas that followed, I would pull up Barneys head and coax another begrudged gallop out of him.. Just anywhere I thought of going. Perhaps to another pond I had located or maybe just on and over the prairie. The nearest neighbor must have been at least three miles away.

The swampy, marshy smell of these lakes especially Grandfather's large lake was pleasant to my nostrils. Water birds of various kinds lived about the lake's rim and among its rushes, and there were never ending flat stones to skip on the waters surface. Once I bounced a sizable skipper off a big rock in the lake and it struck my kid uncle, Ransom, the one younger than I. I guess it was a sharp one for it cut a hole in Uncle Ransom's head and scalp. The blood ran down in front of his ear and dropped on his shirt. He wouldn't let us wash off the blood till all had seen it. Everybody sympathized with him so much that he suddenly felt worse and began to cry. Then all looked at me as though they were just waiting for the sheriff to come and take me. Esla said it didn't amount to anything, which made matters worse and the girls took turns holding the wounded young man in their arms.

But Roy convinced them in spite of protests against such a theory that the skipper struck the rock first so could not have been heaved with any malice aforethought. Almost pridefully I listened to his earnest words in my behalf. "No one could ever think that if he wanted to hit somebody he'd hit the big rock first." "He could hit Uncle Ransom if he wanted to." "If you don't think so you ought to see him knock off insulators." "That kid's the best thrower in Elk Point." "I tell you he wasn't throwing at Uncle Ransom or anybody."

After they had thus learned of the accuracy of my aim at insulators on telephone poles there was a general relaxing, but I hurried out and around the house and made all friendly overtures difficult for them. Such pitch-hitting was like Roy and I appreciated it and forgave him a little for putting the pigeon blood on my face the day we helped dress the pigeons for pie.

Luke Worsing, Frank Devine and several other bachelor neighbors came on Sundays to play base ball and to see the girls. Mother thought it plenty sinful but allowed us to help make up the teams. We were, however, because of our size and age more likely to get hurt than to contribute to the game.

A long blighting drought came over the prairie and grandfather was talking to himself about the clouds and his language wasn't any better than some of the rude, obscene, smutty songs he was always singing to himself in his shop as he made the hundredth repair to some harness.

The lake was nearly dry and all hands dipped up water from the boarded up spring passing the filled buckets along to the big wooden troughs where cattle and sheep fought over each splash from the pails. Some stood guard to keep off the neighbors stock so ours could drink.

After days of heat and hot wind a great rain storm came. Thousands of tiny toads covered the road trails. Everything was green again and the prairie was lovely. The smell of the damp prairie and the marshes, the happy cowbirds and larks and nesting wild ducks, cactus flowers of the most delicate and beautiful tints too beautiful to disturb but good to eat, Indian turnips to look for and nibble at when found young and tender; there was much to keep us interested. It was a grand place to spend the summer vacation.

I drove team for Uncle Will when he cultivated corn. Uncle Al's cultivator had no seat but he put a board on it and Roy drove for him. Esla discouraged our eagerness to help and said we were only in the way. He got more fun watching and listening to Grandfather in his shop and accompanied him twice each week on the mail route. He hated the prairie-chip fuel and wouldn't even help carry in the sacks. Neither would he learn to milk. And I doubt if he ever rode horseback in his life.

The central South Dakota droughts kept Grandfather Tone broke and wretchedly unhappy for a good many years. Life was never very kind to him I guess. I remember him as a fiery Scotch-Irishman with not enough of the Scotch and yet not enough of the Irish. A terrific worker but never a success. A man who whistled and sang incessantly but who beneath it all was so very unhappy that he didn't really care much about anything. No doubt the early death of his first wife when my father, his eldest son, was only twelve, had broken grandpa beyond repair. Folks said he had worshipped her and that she was a very worthy person. With three boys and a little girl, my Aunt Emily, to care for and an irreparable breech between himself and his father, he left all behind to be as nearly forgotten as possible and came west. But they said his heart was always back there in the Wisconsin where he had been "disowned and cut off without a penny," where his half sisters and half brothers lived in fine homes and where Nancy slept in the little grave yard awaiting his final coming to join her. He was buried there beside her after forty odd years of what seemed impatient waiting. At least life did not cheat him of that. My father took care of that for him. His last whispered words were that he be allowed to rest beside her. As I stood at the foot of his bed that night and heard that request and watched his legs straighten and stiffen and his eyeballs roll up, I saw him no longer as the cruel, hard, old man I had known. Instead I saw a very tired, withered, defeated person willingly quitting and wanting to be back as close to her as he could. For thirty-five years now he has been there beside her.
