% [Earliest Memories]^[This book repeats all the stories that were handwritten twice by Ransom M. Tone. Please refer to the transcribed booklet that starts with the story, "The Slough Our Great Play Ground".]  
% Ransom Marion Tone

To my daughter's Peg, Mary and Phyl and my son Rich the following memory account of unimportant happenings of the very early days of their dad may or may not prove interesting some evening when it's too cold or too wet or too something else for more important things.

It is difficult to write in bed, but it is very difficult to read what is written in bed, so I still have the advantage of those brave enough to wade through.

It might even be that no one but myself will be interested. That would seem too bad; but I'll never know who finished and who didn't.

On the Dakota side of the Sioux some two miles below the town of Canton and close up to the river's muddy, clay bank there stood back in the eighties a low unpainted, weather beaten cottage. It stood quite alone, its shed roof well hidden from the sun by numerous soft-wood trees which crowded in upon it from the river. To the exact south-west its opposite and shorter roof faced the afternoon sun which did its best to reach and brighten more than just the front door stoop. But I believe even the generous and faithful sun must have felt the hopelessness of the case as this lonely little recluse of a house drew back into its dark leafy shawl – its too well shaded back yard. Through small, close set, somber eyes it looked out hopelessly, morosely from its shadows apparently uncheered by the gradual rise of green pasture which lay before it to the west beyond the border of the river's trees.

In this lowly and lonely cottage set askew with the world I was born on May 26th 1884. One Sunday morning at eight o'clock the renowned midwife, Gehan, brought and left me on our front door stoop. We always liked Mrs. Gehan. She brought two of my brothers also. I do not remember anything that happened to me in this house. "Whare you first showed your temper and got your first whipping." Before I was a year and a half old we moved to the village of Beloit just across the river in Iowa. But my first home "the Zyppy House", as everyone called it, was neither out of sight nor out of mind from our new abode.

I knew the old Zyppy House well in the years that followed. But I knew it from a reasonable distance say the width of the river or the eighth of a mile it stood off the highway. None of us boys ever went any closer to it than that and even then never alone. For of all the haunted houses I have heard or read about it was the most haunted and most dangerous.

In gangs and on a highway so public as to unite two states with its big bridge we felt pretty safe. This wide interstate road at its very widest space was our main street with its post office and two stores just a stones throw off the bridge. Often after crossing the bridge, careful of getting slivers in our feet, we would stand in the road's warm dust our hands shading our eyes, intent upon discovering some moving object over there at the Zyppy house. Everybody in town knew the place was haunted and our failure to add something authentic to the facts already accepted did not make the hauntings any less real. The fact that I once lived there was something un-understandable. Apparently I got away from there safely anyway. So did the rest of our family.

This space is for notes, corrections, additions by anybody who remembers more or differently.

*"This old Zippy house was torn down. It stood right on the high way. The house you was born in was back from the road. We was afraid to go to the old Zippy house for he was drunk all the time. He had a little raft under the bridge whare he sat and fished, so you boys usto hurry across the bridge."*^[Italics written by Florence Tone.]

Your Grandmother Tone often said that of all her nine children I, her second, was the quietest. But when saying that she never forgot to add, "When he was not crying to the moon," as I so often did for no reason ever found out. Unrecorded but authentic family history has it that I was a stubborn youngster once my slow working mind got around to a decision. As a youngster I seldom forgave an injury or forgot a kindness. I was analytic, microscopically so, and critical, a feature which later developed to proportions quite undesirable. From the sum total of the memory records from which I have been able to draw I do not make out that as a little lad I was very promising. For in addition to my tendency to cry to the moon for no apparent reason and to be unforgiving and stubborn, I was somewhat cowardly. Also I was an assuming little rascal, the pleasant, wholesome kind, whom a little success is likely to make arrogant. – Another feature that has brought me plenty to think about.

Comparing his memory pictures with mine of those days back in the eighties when I learned to walk, strut, fight, compete with others—and run from danger, your grandfather Tone has selected an incident as definitely representing my earliest of fear and occurred prior to October 1886. I was not over two years and five months old.

While with my mother and my oldest brother, Esla, a small dog attacked and practically devoured the three of us. I can not recall the color of that dog, but he bristled and, sidling around us kept me busy for a time trying to decide which side of mother was the safest place for me. Esla drew up his hand and stood his ground and mother tried to deceive me into believing the dog did not intend to tear me to pieces. We were approaching a square white house which had a green lattice around the base of its porch. I think mother was there to rent or buy the house. It stood beyond but not far from Grandpa Starr's home and later became our home. It was not far from the river and the woods—the dark woods in the pasture which furnished an appropriate and concealing habitation for an old witch who though seen by very few was well known to quite a number of the parents of small children whose homes were near the river.

We had been told repeatedly, my brother and I, to stay away from the river. But knowing about the old witch, such demand upon us was quite unnecessary. Of evenings we would go with mother to let down the bars and follow the cow home, but even that was done at great risk. And the pleasure of these trips waned as I learned more about the old witch with the sharp eyes and big nose who wore a dark shawl over her head and carried a long knife. She did not like trespassers on her land which extended to the gate and all along the river. She was especially prejudiced against boys.

Even though mother would lead me by the hand I preferred to stay home – and stayed. Esla didn't seem to realize the danger so much and was fool hardy enough to go so far as the bars. But I knew he was scared and nervous and always keenly on the lookout when on the road. He was a brave fellow then as always and pretty well able to take care of himself anytime anyplace. As for me, my wits, legs, and friends had to and always did protect me – though perhaps not always quite satisfactorily.

The earliest thoughts of my childhood seem at times to be only of a few very definite things or events. However, this can be properly said of only about the first four years. I like to think of events thereafter as forming a more or less perfect network or pattern. In fact the wholeness of this network upon which my memory carries me back from crossroad to crossroad has become with me an accepted fact. Of course the events crowded closely between each of fifty or more mileposts of life cannot be seen all at once nor in proper sequence. For the past does not just extend back over life's trail. It, too, was a living, moving, changing thing. Even from the highest hilltop on the clearest day one sees only dimly what lies behind him in the wide valley below. To see again each crossroad or path, each tree or stump one goes down into the valley again. This requires time and many imaginary meetings, conversations, repetitions of thrilling times of the past.

It has been amply proven to me that time's shuttle moving back and forth weaves a complete and indestructible memory fabric. There are no skips. One memory path leads to another. Around each corner is a day, a season, a year, a decade of life to live over with very little left out.

If anyone doubt the wholeness of memory's fine network, let him go back and visit the old haunts again. Find the old bridge with initials carved into its gray old timbers. Note with displeasure the sadly changed landscape altered by strangers. Visit an evening with some of the folks who yet remain. His interest in them and their answers to his inquiries will render all mention of himself for the time quite out of the question. For once he is too busy to tell where all he has been and what all he has done. With quickened heart and breath he will live again as then in those childhood days of the long ago. For every road on memory's perfect network will lead him to new old paths, and at every crossroad old friends will meet him and beckoning and leading will recount and review acquaintances of the past with such astonishing interest and accuracy as to fairly overcome him with a sad and happy and altogether indescribable emotion. –Anyway you'd probably better come home once in a while after you leave your dad and mother.

Father, a tall, sandy bearded, individual became one of us all of a sudden. He seemed stern and very quiet; but he liked my mother and all of us, and his eyes were unmistakably kind, and his voice was low and soft – to a child a likable thing in a man. I would sit near him and touch him if I could, and liked to hear him talk though I have no memory of what he said. Father could beat even me running, but though the discovery hurt a good deal I did not hold it against him. Nor did I let it get me down; I was a good runner and I knew it. Other kids knew it, too. Father and I raced down the clay path at the front of the house. There was no sidewalk nor any gate. The house stood near the mill and faced the east and the main thorofare(sic) leading northward to the town proper. According to your grandfather's records I was not yet four years old.

And so, my first experiences recallable were of fear, competitive action and egotistical pride, -- all three of which have, I own, come mighty close at times to my undoing. The gang spirit which was later to enthrall me wasn't far ahead.

It was I who was chosen from the whole gang to take the first ride with Romie Carpenter on his new sled. He was a big boy, probably six and twice my age. His selecting me, for which there is no accounting, made me feel about as important as I have ever felt since. With pairs of tar – paper – nail – caps improvised as flat whistles and set under our lips we made plenty of noise as a whole line of wild and speedy human horses took us down the road at terrific speed. The important element in the incident, however, had to do with the honor that had been shown me. Egotism? I suppose so, -- even at such a tender age. Anyway from my earliest years I have thoughtfully pondered this matter. Just how good an opinion of one's self is it wise for a fellow to create and maintain? How is it that one so slow, quiet, unprepossessing, and no doubt timid should assume, inwardly at least, and receive as his right, as I managed to, so much first rate affection, preference, protection and trust? It is an unquestioned fact with me that all my life I have received far more than my share of the better and best. I can't account for it any better now than I could when I was a small boy.

_To Dad and mother_. All are privileged to state their thoughts here, and on later reserved pages. Fire and fall back. I can take it.

Of course only a few will read here who will remember those days and can add anything about them.

*"I don't think you got more than you gave, in fact, I had such confidence in you that I thought you could do most any thing if you just had a chance. You was so dependable and true, that Mother never doubted you. Thay usto (used to) say you had such an hanest face."*

"Bolognie" Monroe was called "Bolognie" on account of his abnormally fat legs and tight fitting knee-britches. He could run like a racehorse. But that was only when he was badly scared. In real foot races I beat him time and again. And I always thought I could catch him before he could get home; which some others failed repeated to do after "Bolognie" had shown the courage to protest against his nick name, and then, with courage rapidly diminishing, had beat it for his front gate which opened on to our walkless smooth-pathed mainstreet. But he was a harmless sort and much too dumb to be the son of the village doctor, which he was. I explored the way the kids picked on him and I would not have chased him for I felt very sorry for him. Later his father shot and wounded his mother as she ran from the house and then took his own life using a razor to do it. Then I felt very sorry for poor "Bolognie".

Not long after beating me in the foot race, father caught the measles. So did we all except mother. We kids were pretty sick and father was blind for a while, neither could he speak, so could not scold or fret any more. But with a heavy stick kept at the head of his bed he would stamp on the floor and mother would hurry to his room after ordering us all to be very quiet. It took father a long time to get over the measles so we could play again.

Uncle Jim came to visit us, but I do not remember him as then except that he promised to give me a watch, but went away and forgot about it.

I have a very early memory of Grandpa Starr's back doorway and the level approach to it. And I remember him, too – his slouch hat, sharp features, and pointed whiskers. His tall, very energetic wife was always neat and her voice though high pitched was lower and stronger than his. I think we called frequently at their home and were always made very welcome.

There was a nest of a billion young spiders in the unplastered ceiling over Mrs. Sorenson's stove in her summer kitchen. I told her about them, but even so important a matter didn't seem to excite her, or even interest her much. I thought that strange.

Gus Englebertson, a loud heavy chap of about twenty who often took me places and sometimes carried me on his shoulders. Got mother's consent to take me with him to the fair at Canton and waited ages for mother and Mrs. Sorenson to get me ready. We were spending the day at Sorensons and I think it was better anyway that I go; because their roomer, Mr. Button, was a night worker at the mill so a day sleeper. Mr. Button had got in my hair times before though I had never seen him and I knew him only through his skinny, unfriendly wife.

At the fair I saw some amazingly large pigs, and wide, mountain-like horses and cows. And brightly clothed men humped over and sitting on horses tails rose high wheeled carts in wild foam-**Sespottered** groups. The horses, some of them in white cloth stockings, seemed to swim along like ducks above the grass as they took the far side of the unfenced track. All this time I sat on Gus's shoulders. Gus's father, a hard, but noticeably kind man, bought pop for me at Mr. Pedelty's stand and I didn't see Gus again that day.

Coming home Clara, Gus's youngest and fattest sister, - about fifteen and one-hundred-fifty, the bully, rode with her father in the spring seat of their double-box wagon. I was invited to share the seat with them, but emphatically preferred to ride on the floor of the wagon with my feet hanging down. Immediately upon arriving back at the Sorenson home and before anything to the contrary might come up, I told my mother in resentful language what I thought of Clara Englebertson – how she had laughed and pointed to where I had sat. Then I explained and showed where Mr. Pedelty had spilled pop on my blouse and pretty much all over me. There was some question about the whole miserable affair as I was being helped by Mrs. Sorenson into fresh clothes. But my explanations were finally accepted and, there being no hard feelings, mother and Mrs. Sorenson and Mrs. Button all laughed. I laughed a little myself, but ceased abruptly when it occurred to me they were over doing it. I think I wouldn't have minded it so much and remembered it all these years if Mrs. Button, the intrusive Mrs. Button, had remained in her own rooms(sic).

It is held by some that no one's memory goes back beyond his fourth year. The facts clearly disprove this theory. Your grandfather's record of changes of residence coupled with my recollections of these incidents is proof enough for me that folks do retain and are able to recount experiences of their second and third years.

It is also held by some that only people who habitually live in their yesterdays retain much of the details of their early experiences. That may be and could be especially true in my case. For in my childhood I certainly lived as whole-heartedly in the past as I later learned to live too much in the future. As people grow older and possibly better experienced they learn, and in exact proportion to their wits, to live whole-heartedly in the present. With an eye to the future, of course, and with pleasant and helpful memories of the past; but with the carefully lived present taking good care of what so soon becomes the past from which only the good, the wise and the strong may ever very wisely draw. Also differing bravely with many much wiser than I do not think the mind forgets thoroughly what it does not want to remember. I see in my past plenty that I would gladly even now bury so deep in the mind's potter field that even I could never find where it was buried. But this I cannot do. It is my record, permanent for me.

Mrs. Pedelty, a tall and well proportioned, aristocratic, English lady with high color in her handsome face and a strangely soft, melodious voice that lent no end of charm to her English accent kept the post office and ran a delicatessen and candy shop in connection. There weren't enough showcases I suppose for someone, my brother was suspected, swiped the tail off one of the little candy birds.

Mrs. Pedelty took me in one winter day and after placing my hands in cold water and drying my eyes, kissed my forehead, which made me well though still faint, and started me homeward. I don't' remember if there was any mail, but there was candy. She was a swell lady.

Mrs. Pedelty's husband, a gray bearded, short man, peddled or took orders for something. He drove a long, one horse, spring wagon and was away much of the time. His older brother lived with the family and was either very odd or really too eccentric. He painted the kitchen stove and pipe with beef grease and smoked out house and store, for they lived in the rear of the store building. Mrs. Pedelty was very angry when she returned home. We thought the incident queer and funny too. Mother thought Mrs. Pedelty's patience could not last much longer. We were glad when the strangely acting uncle left or was taken away, for behind the store was a good place to play when he didn't come out and scare us away with words we did not understand.

It wasn't often that we got a chance to swing in Pedelty's nice swing there at the rear of the store. Little Trixie, in her ever-down-coming and disarranged, three-cornered underwear often sat in the swing eating cookies, her feet dangling and supporting her on the ground. The swing was practically not being used. Trixie was a cute little thing, but no special favorite with anyone except her mother and Percy her crippled brother.

Percy, the oldest son whom we all liked, had hip-disease which Mrs. Elliott, one of Mrs. Eddy's practitioners later tried but failed to cure. You could see right through Percy's hipbone if you happened to be around when his mother treated him. We came to know Percy and the others of the family, Gertie, Trixie, Arthur and Herbert very well and Mrs. Pedelty was present with mother when Arthur, our brother died. I was awakened in the night by her voice saying, "There, there, now Mrs. Tone, you musn't(sic) take it so hard." I think from other things which happened that Mrs. Pedelty was Mother's good friend as long as we lived in the little village.

*Aunty Sorenson was the friend.*

Grandpa Weed whose face I do not recall but whom I remember as a small nervous and somewhat efficient elderly man of religious mind and good repute though of nominal position and most careful economizing, picked up beans enough for a mess in the road where someone had spilled them. He was known to season his meat by hanging it high in the hog shed. And he saved the life of an old horse with a broken leg by suspending the poor old rack of bones in a sling. Then the horse died when turned out.

Our hired girl, from the country, if there was a more rural place than our town, wasn't satisfactory. I detested her. In mother's absence she took Esla and me across the river on a bird-egg hunt, and when mother came home the big lout was enjoying herself by allowing a tiny bird just out of its shell, to walk from the edge of the table into her mouth. To make it do this she breathed and blew upon it. The little bird was cold and trembled and that night it died.

Mother's anger frightened me. I remember it as the first time I knew she could get the way. That girl certainly was no good; and besides she always wanted to play in the cornfield with the boys. I never saw her after the day of the bird egg hunt.

But a child remembers the good as well as the bad. A spoon and a saucer well filled with buttered, mashed potatoes, and a sunny, warm, door step on which to sit would not be forgotten by a boy so eager to eat as I suppose I always was. I won't ever forget that doorstep. Its memory is too much associated with things good to eat.

Neither could a stubby, little tow-headed boy in short, white, button-on, knee pants forget that he was once killed outright by the big kids in a pump-pump-pull-away game. That's what they did to me one late evening out on the Kieth Farm. Those were probably the brightest stars I ever saw prior to the livery stable boxing days that came later, and which are likewise ever to be remembered.

An experience with a skunk is something one remembers, too. One night one of those pretty, strong fellows got into our hen house through a hole under the door, too small for his exit after he had eaten a brood of our chicks. Mrs. Tateshaw our next door neighbor shot him and Esla and I, assisted by our mother, buried him in the garden.

My brother learned to speak pieces at school and also at Sunday school, so did I, --from him and as mother taught him. But I think unless they stole up on me no one ever heard me recite them. I knew all of Esla's first "piece". Some of it comes back to me now. I shouldn't wonder if the parts I omit could be supplied by your grandma Tone from her treasure house memory of "pieces".

>| I'm my mother's little man  
>| I'm the chief of all the clan  
>| Though there's Ned and Ted and Fred  
>| If you please, sir, I'm the head.
 
>| I clean the walk and ………  
>| ………………..  
>| Anyday I'd walk a mile  
>| To see my pretty mother smile."

Not so good. I seem to have forgotten it. It was nearly 50 years ago.

I attended school one day just before my birthday. I liked it at first, but while working at clay moulding(sic) at the sand table. I was bossed and bullied by the big kids who insisted I talked too much and too loud. I was furious enough to be willingly led out of there and taken home by my brother. I remember so well how I gave the entire school a right dirty look over my shoulder as I departed. I never attended school again until I entered the second grade at Elk Point along with my brother. Esla took care of that for me, and Mrs. Bomas worried a long with me. I skipped the 1st grad entirely.

I attended Sunday school at our church, of course, and among my treasured souvenirs are some square, bible verse, picture cards given me for attendance by Mrs. Carpenter. Her name and the date 1887 are on the cards. Only a very thoughtful mother would preserve such things for careless boys. I believe these cards and brother Arthur's little striped cap have meant more to me than have the watch and razor of John Tone who soldiered with and entertained at his home (now standing) General George Washington at Manmouth.

On my fifth birthday Mr. Long, the tall teacher who had thought it better that Esla take me home and that I remain at home, gave me a purse with five pennies in it. My quarter day's attendance at school had paid anyway.

Mabel Thorson was the only girl I could really see up till this time; and she had a lot of freckles; and her brother was a lot prettier than she. But I admit there was something about her that was different.

The Sioux was good fishing. Sometimes we fished there under the big bridge. But this was against strict orders from home. We were expected to go on across the bridge without stopping there and do our fishing as well as our swimming in Beaver Creek, a little, brush fringed, bull head stream that meandered here and there in the fields on the Dakota side. It was all right for swimming but certainly was the weeds for fishing. It was at Beaver Creek some of us learned a little about diving and swimming assisted by good pushes from father. He had taken a bunch of us there and grew tired of hearing us count preparatory to diving into the deep pool. I got out all right but there was a lot less water in the swimming hole. And I think I held a grudge for a while.

Old Zyppy, a well known drunk who had come to live in the house where I was born, sold fish which he caught from his wide flat boat. He seemed always there by the bridge when we wanted to try our luck for a few minutes before going on the Beaver Creek. And as we had shouted at him on several occasions and he had threatened to do many things to us we always approached the bridge cautiously.

Once after assuring ourselves that the coast was clear we baited our hooks and cast off from the bridge like the men in the village often did. Imagine our plight and excitement when we saw old Zyppy coming up on the bridge. Imagine also my plight when, though safely arrived at the Pedelty barn, I found my fish hook was so securely lodged in the seat of my pants and in me that none of the kids could dislodge it for a long time. Zyppy was often pretty drunk but never too drunk to fish or to shake his fist at us and curse us though his nose.

Frank Starr was the star fisherman. We would watch him for hours at a time as he fished standing on a board across the stern of his light boat he made me want to be a great spearsman too. The Sioux was clearer then, probably had more woods and meadows and fewer plowed fields adjoining it than in later years.

An outstanding village character was Dumbie. Some called him Deafie (with a long e) but his name was Dumbie. This slender, humped over, long faced, very religious, middle aged bachelor was friendly to everybody and especially to the kids of the town. And everybody was his friend, too.

With kindly grunts and without lines or whip he drove and led a small, bright boy steer hitched to a heavy cart with a high crate in which were carried wood and sacks of feed from the mill, - also his lunch and a jug of water when long trips were made. He traveled slowly and appeared odd enough to be really funny. But no kid was ever so unwise as to grunt or point at him a second time. It wasn't so much because folks wouldn't tolerate it as because there was something sad or helpless or both in the large, wide open eyes, - something that seemed to say plainly to inquisitive folks, "I know so well my limitations, but I am a trustworthy person. You will find it is so."

We took our shoes to Dumbie's small cottage to be repaired and if we waited he would talk to us a good deal without really hearing what we said and without the use of so much as one word. In my imagination I talked with Dumbie a good many times after we left Beloit, and would see him in his slouchy, pulled down hat and shrunken, permanently baggy, black pants going along by the side of his cart northward across the paths on the vacant lots, then eastward past the school house, across the tracks, past the flax bins and grain elevator and on up the low hill to the orphant's home where "Cigar" (his name was Seeger) and Andy and Cecil lived.

You have now seen how a father having nothing else to do and being imbued with the spirit of by gones and their total recall can stretch out over pages. I fancy you all agreeing to the suggestion that from here we cut across lots and get somewhere. So with the threatening statement that I could actually fill a volume with the events of my first four or five years, but also the assurance that I won't, I will from here on bring up only the most exciting events of the remaining years I spent at Beloit.

No doubt the most exciting moments of my early days came the time your uncle Esla slipped and went over the dam at the mill. It was on one of our return trips from Beaver Creek. That time a gang of six of us decided to go down the river and cross on the dam instead of returning the accustomed way by the bridge. This, although a new procedure so far as our parents were concerned, was nothing new in our lives. For every one of us from myself up to Ralph Anderson had crossed there many times before. It was easy fun to jump over the narrow ribbons of water that ran over the leaky old dam. We thought nothing of it during low water times. Sometimes there wasn't even a single ribbon running, so leaky was the dam or so low was the river. Every one of us had, for that matter, been down under the dam at times to look for fish caught there later than the last raid by the men in the mill. From the rock pools down there the men sometimes took out as much as a tub full of nice ones.

Well on this particular day the smooth, level water above the dam was high and getting higher. She was brimming full and many white ribbons, some of them pretty wide, were running. The river seemed maddened at being held back, and eager to find new places to get on over. There was a tension there that would have warned and scared back older and less foolhardy boys.

Although the flume on the mill side was roaring and the leakage in places under and through the dam was swift and foaming and made great swirling rough eddies in the deep dark water below, even this wasn't enough to relieve the tension. Soon the rise would cover the dam entirely. A hundred and fifty feet of roaring torrent it would become, a great sight from the shore but certainly no safe thorofare for us six kids.

We did a little surveying, and I remember that the thing uppermost in my mind was whether I could hang on to my willow pole and can of bait while negotiating the wider streams. They were pretty wide and we knew they might get wider any moment. Perhaps that thought hurried us along. Anyway nobody even suggested that we go back and around the other way. And so we went on.

We were in the middle of the dam. So far so good. It had been easy that far. But now we came to a wide ribbon. It wasn't really bad though. Ralph leaped and showed us how easy it was if you took a little run. He urged us on from his side of this widest of all the strips. Once over that a fellow could surely breathe easier and the rest would be pickings. We might even hang our feet over the flume and watch the foam and look for big fish jumping down there.

The roar about us was a little disconcerting; but it only excited me and I do not remember any feeling of fear until someone up ahead balked. What happened during the next ten seconds I have never been able to fully recall.

I was the youngest and last in the procession, and undoubtedly if there was any worry it had been over me. It is reasonable, too, that your uncle Esla was next to me for I was always at his heels. However, notwithstanding this marching order, Esla was second to leap and he leaped quickly after someone else had turned back. Probably he slipped for he landed in the middle of the swiftly escaping stream and riding on the small of his back, was quickly swept away and down the long planks over the lower edge of the dam into the snarling foamy abyss below.

For a long time we did not see him, -the undercurrents had him. But after what seemed interminable agony to me the black water tossed him high. We could see his shoulders above the foam. He was striking at the water both hands beating in unison. His head was back, his chin up. And then he was gone again. Like a feather in the wind his frail little body shot around in the eddy that was bringing him back towards the dam. And again he disappeared. Again we could see him, this time only the top of his head as he sank the fourth time.

Ralph Henderson, the oldest of our gang and the only one to cross the wide water strip, had paused only long enough to take in the situation. And then he ran with all the speed he had across the remainder of the dam leaping streams as he went and was soon over the flume and in the mill, up to the second floor, and dragging his father with him down the stairs.

All this time Harry Henderson had been jumping up and down and yelling at the top of his voice for Esla to "keep-a-going don't give up; they'll get here; etc." He supposed and of course the others of us did, too, that Esla could hear. But nothing could be heard above the roar of the falling water all about us. I was mute and trembling and chilled standing there with my chin forward and my temples throbbing.

Mr. Henderson came running. He took off his jacket as he came and his congress shoes came off as by magic, the last off flying in the air before the first had come to rest. It was speedy time he made but it didn't seem fast enough. With a couple of short tripping steps and then one or two long ones he dove headlong far out into the dark water. I thought he, too, had been lost so long a time we waited for him to come up. But at last a soothing relief came when two other men leaned out from the dam and received Esla, then helped Mr. Carpenter to climb up. I learned afterwards that they worked over Esla for a long time; but as I was picked up and carried across and away from the dam I did not see Esla again until he and I started for home from Mrs. Henderson's back door.

A little before dark your worried grandmother, with her shawl over her head, set out to find her tardy Beaver Creek fishermen. We met her at the gate. I think she felt relieved and happy that we hadn't drowned in Beaver Creek. When asked why the strange and oversize clothing Esla wore we had to tell her of the horrible event and what a great man Mr. Henderson had turned out to be.

Your grandmother became excited and kept looking at us, but mostly at Esla, whose blue ringed eyes and tired face and shoulders were pathetic. Then she cried a little as she gave us our supper, and the next day she sent us with gifts for Mr. Henderson and Ralph and a quarter of a dollar for Harry. If my memory is correct it was a long time after that before either the river or Beaver Creek was considered a safe place for us. To pass the time Esla and I drifted about town and would visit with Joe Sedgwick the friendly, new station agent.

I think I was proud, and showed it, to be with and related to the object of so much notice and comment as so great an event as nearly drowning had made my brother. But Esla shrank from fame and renown then as always in later life. He disliked openly all such things and would quickly turn a cold shoulder on ostentatious or fanferon(sic) friends. He always predicted they would "get worse probably."

Your uncle Esla in later years became a unique character. So frank and sincere and independent and loyal was he that he had few halfway friends. Folks either went with him in a big way or had nothing to do with him. Cold figures, sharp justices, and bold courage coupled with an enslaving industry, brought him some success, but brought also an early death after years of invalidism in New Mexico.

A frail little man he seemed at ten, but as straight as an arrow and like the arrow as tough and sharp as he seemed delicate. In spite of all his handicaps, his long sieges of rheumatic fever, and heart and lung trouble, he was the most dexterous and versatile person I have ever known. He did things, such things as it served his purpose to do, easier, quicker and better than any of us. And his wits, bravery, and independence got him by. He never looked for trouble but never ran from anybody. He didn't care what anybody thought or cared or said or did. And though he had plenty of ideas, he had no advice to give out.

Father gave mother a big, bright bay and surrey that took us on many happy Gypsy trips. They were slow, time-killing trips sometimes made boisterous by our sketchy songs about "macaroni" and "a feather in your hat." We took turns riding the horse and sometimes sat backwards on his wide back, uncomfortable but happy. I don't remember the old fellow's name, but I remember of standing in his feed box to bridle him and not succeeding. Esla said you pressed in on a horse's cheek to make him open up. I don't think it worked. If he bit off two of my fingers, as I remember he did, there are no scars now to prove it. He was a kind, awkward, big jawed brute. His stall was hard for mother to clean and I helped her. I also pulled hay from the stack for him. Up over his stall in the hay mow were kittens which your grandpa says I hid against his threat to give them away, and then boasted to him that he couldn't give them away because he couldn't find them. Then I told him how well they were hidden and just where. This tickled your grandpa so much that he didn't look for the kittens.

There was a farm a great distance, probably so much as two miles, in the country which I wanted very much and for a certain purpose to visit. One day I was taken there. We did not go in our comfortable, two-seated, tassel-canopied surrey. Perhaps we didn't have it then. Some friends took us there in a high spring wagon drawn by eight nimble and fleet legs to which the deep ruts seemed as no ruts at all. They skimmed over the winding, unfenced and ungraded road like eight fast boys at play and it was great fun watching them from my high perch in the seat with the driver. I made the interesting discovery too, that the hind foot of a trotting horse reaches past and is set down beyond the place vacated by the front foot.

I cannot say how old I was that day when those long forgotten friends took us to the Gehan farm except that I was very young and much too small for the big spring seat. However, I remember pretty well how we arrived all excited and with such loud talking and laughter and kissings among the ladies that my brother and I found it easy to slip away and look around a bit. We explored the milk house with interest. There we saw cold spring water coming from nowhere and passing through a tank in the floor and on out and down the hill. The milk cans in the tank were shiny and the room smelled sweet and clean as it apparently was kept.

But the consuming question about the Gehan house where we found ourselves a little later was what was behind a certain door that opened off the dining room, - a door which was under no circumstances or conditions to be opened. For it was there behind that door that Mrs. Gehan, well known as the midwife of the community, kept the babies for all the people's homes. She kept them there until they were old enough and big enough o give away. My future, for a chance to open that door! And how it was guarded. Behind that door would be hundreds of beautiful baby faces, round and pink and smiling. Think of it! And it was so near. I listened. There wasn't a sound coming from there. Esla listened, too, and his eyes were larger than mine. The weighty and unquestionable reasons for the too great silence and the closely guarded secrecy were none too satisfying. But they had to do. No further enlightenment or advancement was to be made at present. That was definitely made final.

Certainly such unfair inculcations into our unprepared baby-room song and dance was no less than criminal. Such teachings should have brought to our dear mother and those other feminine bullies shame and remorse instead of the merriment and stolen, wise side glances it probably did bring. Not for many moons did your uncle Esla and I ever for one moment question the magic of Mrs. Gehan and her kindly husband and their secret incubator behind the door.

Kittybelle Stanley, a lively, friendly, blue-eyed, little girl with a big smile for everybody and hugs for the grownups and smaller babies, gave a party; but she did not enjoy much of it herself. Kittybelle had several younger brothers and sisters, a tall, rather good looking, slow spoken, high voiced mother, and a hook wormed little pa whose pants were frayed at the bottoms from dragging on the railroad ties where he worked. They lived in a smelly, low house set well into the small hill not far over the town bridge on the Dakota side.

When a boisterous boy sheds a tear because an impatient little hostess burns and blisters her hands in a kettle of brewing taffy it is because he is only a child, himself younger even than she. Of course we all liked Kittybelle a great deal and I wasn't the only one that wept with her. She certainly screamed and ran away from that kettle. Esla didn't cry. He said she should have waited. Poor child. She was bandaged up and put away and the party wasn't nearly so good without her. We played on the hill behind the house and in the old barn shed. There seemed to be hundreds of us, but I guess we were really about a dozen in all.

On the way home just at dark it was warm and quiet and the katydids and crickets sang softly and beautifully. I lagged behind the others that better to hear such exquisite sounds and to touch the tall grass whence they came. We went slowly home, every one of us dreamy and happy I was sure.

That stillness and those soft sounds were from that other world of real people where I often went and liked so much to be. This was the time of day I liked best. Then wagons and people were still and even the late cuckoo birds were quiet up in the trees.

Arthur, our baby brother, had died, and his tiny casket had been taken in a spring wagon on a rainy day and on a very muddy road to our church and then to the hillslope east of town and left there. And I knew he would thenceforth be quite alone and uncared for by us. I wonder if it was my fanciful thoughts about things not understandable that saved me from total collapse. In some measure at least I seemed to find in things fanciful and not at all understood a satisfaction for my never ending desire for some explanation about Arthur.

The reason for his plight and our unwarranted loss and grief. The best I could make of it was that terrible as it was there was no other way. It had to be and probably was best because everything else was right. Except for that the world was so very happy, and I was told Arthur was happier now than when with us.

However, none of the explanations of the heavenly will and the assured and undoubtable protection and comfort that is truly meted out to all ever really did anything for me then or in any later times of grief or loss or trouble.

I think it was and always has been my uncommon closeness to nature (and perhaps in my early years with the mysterious) that have served most to hold me to my feet and keep me hopeful in my less happy times. Hopeful against any drifting into the cynical, despondent, hopeless paths that are so open to and easy for so many folks who, like myself, haven't found satisfaction and peace in adherence to any of the creeds or codes so earnestly and conscientiously perfected and protected for the spiritual good of others.

The magnificent symphonies of the crickets and katydids and all their kind from their mysterious and friendly world thrilled me beyond any words to express such divine emotion. When I learned to go to that world of theirs, as I did, every living creature became more beautiful and was important; so important as to be expected and waited for in his turn. When at evening not another chirp or call was expected from the trees and there was no sound of wagons or people and even the cuckoo bird's diminishing good nights had ceased and he had fallen asleep deep in his comfortable nest, and the only sounds audible came from the grass, I was actually excited and thrilled by the approach of darkness. No other orchestra or setting has entertained me more or held me so entranced as those soft, sweet symphonies played as the sky brought out his stars and placed them down closer over us. It was done so we could see better and feel that everything was all right and would be until the moon got around to look after us. Then the sky and his stars would go back a little but not entirely away, they being still needed. All these things were as real as life to me.

And vastly numerous other things of a similar character not only thrilled me again and again but have remained with me with the good intention, no doubt, of aiding me in making right and normal decisions in some matters far too important to be entrusted to less dependable friends. Alone I would sit and wait for the whispers of the breezes. They seemed definitely going somewhere but pausing now and again, listening themselves. Some of my very earliest memories are of the sighing, singing, happy, busy breezes and their loitering, bee-like haste. Each was certainly endowed with a definite and independent personality. That was certain. Intently I would stare at these and other facts seeing them dimly. I wished but hesitated to share my finding with someone. But gradually I learned to shield and guard all such thoughts and fancies and keep them strictly to myself.

Even after coming out of these child dreams I felt and believed, as I now do, that everything is of great importance to everything else. The breeze, the dew, the clouds, the showers, hill, trees, valleys, flowers, birds and insects, all things that are, even the people, or nearly all of them, were lovely and probably at all times at their best.

You may call it too elementary thinking to be recorded. But I think if you do, you cannot believe such thinkings(sic) have yielded me much gold and you have lost or overlooked something. For truly I feel that such thinking has paid me well. It's just that I haven't been able to show you how much. I suppose a child is happy because his mind isn't cluttered up. If he could only keep that way and take life as it comes he might remain kindly always towards all about him which, in a big measure at least would mean his happiness and more happiness for others as well. You know Old Am tells Orphan Annie that his ready acceptance of things as they are has kept him pretty well in time with things in general for quite a stretch of time.

As surely as man needs a God and a religion they must be extended to include and dignify all else that is.

The blind acceptance of the supernatural is a child's prerogative. Inherent faith gropes towards deity – or the mystic or both. Unconsciously we accept for a time at least a very great deal that later seems quite outside and beyond the bounds of reality. But I wonder if not the whole process of living is constantly relieving us of the things which have once been factual in our lives but are no longer so. Of course we think of the very opposite as being true. But even truths have their beginnings and endings. They replace and are replaced.

Environment, but more especially ones early home surroundings will determine, of course, to what lengths he may go with that shifting, changing faith he has picked up or otherwise acquired. Some of it seems and is necessary to his best living; but if allowed too much latitude how destructive of his best interests it may become.

Whatever else may have been the matter with me from the beginning I was certainly richly endowed with a blind faith in the goodness of everything. The kindly personality I attributed to all things both animate and inanimate made my living well worth while in my younger days.

Perhaps being born in a country so blessed with nature's abundancies had something to do with it. It takes bruises and what goes with hard living to make us think earnestly and constructively. There were no hardships for me then. I was at ease both physically and mentally, - conditions ideal for the growth in me of all that was idealistic. Swimming and growing in the oil of human kindness, prayed for and learning to pray in order that my life might grow into a life of full and complete service. I can understand now how it went with me during those very early years of my life. Realistically the rest of the world went on with its business while I, buttoning my coat tighter each year of my young life, saw things pretty much as I wanted them to be. 

The extraordinary and growing faith I required for such idealistic living was later to engulf me. In it I became floundered and very nearly wholly submerged. For that which becomes too ideal is not good for any of us. We must learn to face facts and the sooner the better. If we don't, stern reality will sooner or later overtake us – find us out, and what then?

At the risk of supercilious frowns I will continue, but not for long, in this tenor. For even though it fail utterly in its intended purpose I shall get no end of satisfaction out of the reflecting and telling of it, it being my aboundant(sic) duty, no doubt, to do so. These earliest best qualities of mine, ie. the genuine love for and unstinted kindliness toward everybody and everything and the insatiable desire to be helpful as well as a somewhat metallic will with which to carry on kept right on growing. In fact these fine qualities grew and flourished to the detriment of some other certain qualities which, had they been nurtured with equal care and interest, might have provided me with a little sense of humor instead of a total void of that same. And there might have developed in me more real spunk and less of sentimental acceptance of things as they were or as others wanted them to be. There was endless harmful forgiving and turning of the other check. I think it was Theodore Roosevelt who finally helped me out of that ditch. 

Believe it or not I was so thoroughly unselfish and sure of the ultimate prevalence of right and justice that some of my living actually bordered on martyrdom, - and I got a kick out of it. However grieved and shocked I would become at times there was no hatred nor any striking back. Love and not force was always to be the source of my power. A dangerous philosophy. Struggling endlessly to believe things were as I wanted them to be the normal and wise relinquishing of many of these earlier ideals has been fraught with long and bitter unrecountable pain. Our ideals are like our affections. The more concealed the deeper they burn and the harder to relinquish they become. 

It seems to strange to me now that rampant as were my thoughts in this direction, hypersensitive my feelings, and unduly loyal and steadfast my affections I didn't get hurt more at the time. Of self-pity I knew nothing. On the contrary I was forever applying the whip of censorship to myself. With less seriousness and self-discipline to encumber me I could certainly have fought better my external battles. I wonder even now if I must always suffer from this chronic malady – self-discipline.

My one redeeming feature then was that superior feeling of mine already mentioned. Well concealed as I always kept it it always sustained me, gave me the courage and endurance I needed – the unreal kind, I guess, that all superior feeling persons seem to possess.

Well, eventually reality overtakes us all and our grand structures of what ought to be or was going to be give way. We find ourselves outside those high, protecting walls of ideality, outside where right and goodness and justice sometimes seem almost unknown.

I am sure that however short of perfection your mother's and my efforts have been we have not failed to show you that life must be met as it is. It has been our intention to let you develop normally, but also definitely to temper you each day and year of your lives to the otherwise chilling, shrinking, cold from without. And we have tried to do this without any noticeable thickening of your skins.

It was in 1933, in the early fall, when your mother and I were on our way to the World's Fair at Chicago that we drove across the new, steel Sioux River bridge that had replaced the old time one at Beloit. I wanted to show your mother where I attended school for a quarter of a day and what a grand little place Beloit probably still was.

But I was disappointed, for no town was there for us to see. I couldn't show your mother many of the old places as I had hoped to. They were gone. Not a house or building was in sight at first except the mill. The old home where I was born was no longer there. There was only a field there beside the unshaded riverbank. The trees, too, were gone. Only a low plowed hill marked the place where Kittybelle Stanley burned her fingers in the taffy and Nell, her mother, chopped the wood after Frank, her pappa, had gone to his work.

Polluted with sewage the condemned, murky water of the river was disappointing. The mill was there to the south, and running too, with the swallows swarming as before at its high eaves. And, would you believe it, Dumbie's little, one room cottage was still down there by the mill. I am sure it was the cottage in which our old pal used to mend our shoes and talk to us in his strange language listening all the while with his large attentive eyes. Our old house, where we last lived before leaving Beloit, had burned down. I wanted to see its steep pitched gables and the fine trees I thought would be there. But the grove was shabby and thin over the weedy grass and fire blackened foundation stones. They told us that all of the store bldgs and good houses had many years earlier been moved to Canton two miles up the river.

Back in the trees near the river was an old very much run down and empty house, windowless, and with only half a chimney still standing. This I took to be the old Starr home where lived that quaint and kindly old couple so interested in and good to all the kids of my day. For the moment they seemed there to greet me and then the forlorn condition of the old home brought back the sad realization that they had been gone to their heaven for a quarter of a century or more.

It was just beyond this home in the pasture in the woods, behind the gate bars that the old witch had waited of evenings to catch me, but had been foiled time and again by my thoughtful precaution to take your grandmother along with me when she went to fetch the cow.

Doubtless the indulging in excesses of feeling and emotion is as unwise as any other intemperance. But who is wise enough to give us much welcome advice concerning our affections? Our affections are not less real and not less costly because not wholly warranted. Even grownups do not always realize how unduly they sometimes grieve. I will not say I learned to like too well the folks and things and places I first knew. It may be though. After we left Beloit it took me several years to replace with other interests a gnawing, wearing, homesickness that settled over me and made me very unhappy. Often the crowing of a rooster or the ring of an anvil in a shop, or even the sight of certain birds or green meadows, or overgrown paths would fill me with grief and distress. The cold rains fell also on the hillside where Arthur was alone. We all used to be there, ought to be there now, but would never be there anymore.

# After Beloit, Elkpoint

We felt quite grown up and also traveled, my three brothers and I; and our very young mother thought she was somebody, too, I think. She must have felt her young charm just a little for in addition to being the mother of us four men she passed admirably as our sister, and many a lady and also gentlemen would, with pattings on our heads and a smile for mother remark about the great resemblance among us four boys and our sister, too. However the little **"mother" smiled mother best** and she would promptly set the inquisitive ones right by saying meekly but proudly, "They are my sons." Then there was great astonishment on the face of the inquisitors and on the faces of all within earshot. For mother was only a girl and a slender girl. Mother always seemed happy, though I have wondered in years that followed how anyone could be happy with four such undetachable ball and chains.

Today mother was especially happy. At times I heard her humming and I noticed her extreme tenderness and patience as she slicked us up for a presentable landing on the high plank platform from the dusty RR coach that had been ours much too long. Our father would be there to welcome us, our father who was our chiefest god and whom we hadn't seen for several months. Mother's childlike affection for that tall, strong and very quiet father of ours was equaled only to the noticeably tender fatherly possession and devotion of which no one was capable but father. What a father! And how proud we all were of him! And how well everyone who knew us knew these things. Mother had everything his wages (fair for the times) **and credit also good could provide**. And I guess he felt well paid by her wholehearted devotion and childlike dependence.

Our new home in a town much larger than Beloit and entirely new to us was the thing uppermost in our minds as we climbed into the old Merchant's Hotel Bus to be deported at the hotel for a few days pending the completion of our house. Back from a trip of several month's duration on which we seemed to have made the rounds of all our relatives we were now permanently located at Elk Point. Merrill, Wausau, Ripon, Beloit – these were some of the places I would always remember – some with pleasure – some otherwise.

At Merrill we visited our great uncle Will Foster, who was almost "Ripley" in his family relation to us, being mother's uncle and father's brother in law. Uncle Will Foster was doubly our uncle. He was Grandmother Foster Tone's brother and he was the husband of my father's sister Emila Tone. There were five kids as I remember them. He went out of his way, as mother often said, to be nice to us. Uncle Will worked for the Electric Co. and lorded over the men in the street car barn. His wife though "kindness itself" was quite impossible. One late evening the ladies and quite a few other neighbor ladies and girls went swimming in the river; but we boys were not permitted to accompany them because some of the girls had no bathing suits. A man appeared on a long sand bar and frightened them home. Which served them right. We picked winter green and luscious timber rasberries(sp) far back in the woods ever watchful for bear and also fearful of getting separated from the older ones and getting lost. The river was crammed with logs and there was prospects of a big gorge. I wanted to walk on the logs as some men did and help break up the jam. But it was thought best otherwise.

At Wausa(sp) there were other relatives on Grandmother Fosters' side all of whom I have forgotten except Uncle Wen..and greatgrand mother – the singer….

We visited also at Lacrosse, but with whom I do not remember, probably with relatives though.

At Beloit a cross old lady, a lecturer on Christian Science or something reigned over the stone establishment, and some other relative of hers and ours protected the precious long stone stables, especially the window glass therein. Each p.m. our great uncle Ransom who was staying there at the time would take us boys out across the river for long a walk. I wondered why we stayed so long and if we were really welcome and was glad when it was announced that we had heard from father and were going to start for E.P. and our new home.

Dressed alike, even to the large bow ties and bright silver buckles we wore on our oxfords we three older boys, feeling our oats must have been quite a trying gang for our mother. Milo though no longer a baby still wore dresses which put him in a class all by himself and apart from the three of us.

Immediately after our arrival at E.P. father had to leave and the carpenters working on our house were slow getting it finished. Meantime we stayed at the hotel.

After the tobacco stains had been unsuccessfully removed from the floors and mopboards we moved into the home. Like colts in new pasture we boys ran about he place, climbing the box elders, battling our way through the dense plum thickets. There was much to be done to put the place in shape and father was busy every minute when at home.

We surveyed our surroundings with great interest. On two sides of us there were no houses for we were on the very SW corner of town and we were bounded on the west by a far reaching slough of green densely grown sunflower and hemp sported with clumps of large willows and a few enormous cottonwoods. This wild tangle of weedy pasture land extended to the river, the Missouri River. Here was a wilderness fit for any boys and we took charge of its sand hills, its trees, its flowers and birds. In its low swails which flooded wach year we swam and sailed our rafts and crude boats and skated in winter. On its knowls(sp) we built our camps and forts. Through its brush and weeds we charged the enemy continuing the unfinished battles from day to day.

When Mr. Dupont came for his divorce and built the big house and put in 3 wire fences with a board all along the top we felt an encroachment and his overseer, Mr. Martin, and their jersey bull became our enemies. We teased both. For Mr. Martin had hired us to walk through the wheat field with him and break off the mustard blossoms just prior to a visit from the Dupont agent. We worked all day and he told us to meet him the following Saturday p.m. at the footbridge and receive our pay. After waiting at the appointed time and place until nearly night he came and paid us each a nickle(sp). We were a sad and also mad bunch. So mother sent us to the mill thereafter to buy feed for our cow instead of to the Martin feed store.

Shorty quick, a very tall boy about 15 years old lived across the road from the new brick school house. He made whistles from the pumpkin vine stocks and showed us how it was done.

In the early fall E.P. was a busy place in contrast to quiet Beloit. The regular town activities seemed rushing to me. Everyone seemed busy and going about in pellmell fashion under the town's great parasol of spreading box elders and maples which were almost interlaced above some of her streets. I remember so well the board sidewalks, and ash crossings the half-eaten hitching posts and rails and the side streets made atrociously smelly by them. The old town pump, the W.G. Hatter horse drawn dray and Ed Oasson's mules and dray – also his sloppy boots with leather pulless hanging out like ears.

At Charley Mitchell's main street blacksmith shop everything was in great confusion and as dirty as it was old and smelling. It was leaning a little and the roof had leaked in places for years. Charley's place had grown old with him yet like him was still standing and carrying on. Like him a little stooped, a little worn, a little gray, and tired but the fire in its forge still glowing and its big bellows still responding in guttural blasts when called into action. His pointed beard, long gray hair, his heavy leather apron in shreds. The forge is generally the center of attention. Not so here. He was. Tall, slow, stooped, powerful, his voice low heavy, rough, his eyes large and convincing. His hearty laugh like his spoken words seemed to come from down deep behind the leather apron. His hands hadn't been clean in 40 years. No cleaner then his language which was vile. Later the mingled smells, atrocious yet agreeable, his stories, profanity and vulgar laughter kept him an audience – and often of the town's best. Be times he'd smoke a few drags from a very dark colored large bowled pipe he kept on a protruding brick in the forge chimney. The smoking did not interfere with his chewing. He lighted his pipe with a stick dipped into the forge or with a lit iron seized quickly and held dangerously before him in heavy tongs. He was fond of children and we always felt welcome there even when older folks sat or stood leaning in front of the forge to hear what was being said. He was always playing jokes. Once, after years of knowing better, at his request we drove around and stopped in front of the shop just to see what he would say. He was surprised and pleased and came out his great arms aKimbs(?) and laughed with us. It was a good joke. But he knew that we knew and at last we had responded to his many requests over a period of two or three years. Charley Mitchell, the town's chief smithy, none better and no place in town more entertaining then his shop. His only child, petite Pearl with black curls and red ribbons (I suspected her of being an adopted child) sang in the choir at our church. And I believe Old Charley must have "owed not any man" though beyond the shadow of a doubt he never saw the inside of a church, so did not hear Pearl sing there in all his life. Pearl was the apple of his eye as everyone knew and when she married Teedy Wiseman and moved to Nebraska and Mrs. Mitchell died suddenly Old Charley just naturally stopped everything but breathing. No more boisterous talk, or deep chuckles. He was dead on his feet till the day he died in a fit of overintoxication. 


# Winner and the "Leadora"

We searched for the "lost Leadora" and found it but not until the following year. What a thrill to stand on or above her 150 ft deck! She ran aground in '66 May 21st and Mr. Winner spent years and much of his earnings trying to salvage her cargo of 100 bbls of whiskey, tons of dry goods and groceries were of course worthless. However, it was said by some that her cargo including the bbls of whisky was removed soon after she ran aground. (See news report of "The Loss of the Leadora").

Mother and we four boys spent several summers on the ranch at Grandfather Tone's in Hand Co. Grandfather had many cattle and sheep, also the large family of 14, eight of whom were at home at this time. Uncle Will who was about 10 years my senior became my hero. To the exclusion of all others Uncle Will and I formed a two-way society and companionship that was of real affection and lasted for many years. I did not admit it to mother or anyone else, but Uncle Will beyond a doubt was first with me in all matters and although we never got around to starting the big horse ranch we planned to own I learned eagerly and with a little swagger some of the things a big rancher needs to know in order to hold his own and be a success in that field.

Grandfather's home the first summer we visited there consisted of two up to the minute cave and sod structures. One entered the larger one through a square hole by means of a perpendicular ladder. Wide earthen benches all around three sides served as seats by day and springless beds by night. They were carved into the walls or rather left there when the digging was done. In places they had caved off and so beds were made narrower and irregular. The foul odors and bed bugs of this room chased me out immediately and only for meals and to get away from rain, which seldom fell, did either Esla or I ever go down the ladder.

That first summer there was a great drought. Crops were dried out and lakes became dry. The men had to build many long troughs and draw water form the springs. They worked in shifts and the girls helped all working into the night. Finally a great rain came and large hailstones fell killing nearly all of Aunt Cora's turkeys and chickens young and old. Code was heartbroken but pretended she did not care much. She took her gunny sacks and went out as was her regular custom to gather buffalo chips. This was Aunt Code's chiefest occupation anyway when not caring for her chickens and turkeys or helping with the milking. She seemed always sad and sullen and unhappy and when teased would often snap back in defense then retire from among the rest and "cry bucketfulls" and "feel sorry for herself". I felt very sorry for her especially after mother told them they must not treat her so. And Uncle Will did his best to cheer her. I could see that he cared deeply for her and sometimes after much trying his coaxings would get from her a two syllable sort of laugh. But there was no smile. Uncle Will said she laughed best when hurt as when Old Doll the big mare kept on a picket line because she could not be caught otherwise, dragged her through a colony of cactus. The long thorns went so deeply into her knees that I thought only she could have stood having them pulled out. Even then only fear of grandpa's surgery upon his return from his trip with the mail, which he made twice weekly, persuaded her to let others help her. She sat on the ground and wept but did not cry out nor speak. Esla told me on the side that she'd have pulled them out herself if they'd left her alone.

Frank Devine a young homesteader neighbor with a black mustache, small boots, an appetite for whiskey, and a local renown for his tap dancing wanted earnestly to marry Code and told her so, so many times that she hated him. She had ambitions to get away from the prairie and go to school and become a teacher. Which ambitions alas were never attained though she did later finish the 7th and 8th grades while living with us at E.P. If Devine waited for her to come back as some said he did he was disappointed for she escaped him by staying away – escaped him to marry a devil-on-wheels whom she loved and who by his selfishness and abuse broke her body, heart and mind. She died in a hospital for the insane.

If mornings, after helping Uncle Ransom who though my uncle was a year younger than I, put on his congress shoes and going with him on Old Dan to see if the older boys had turned out the sheep – his with the others – etc, etc, we breakfasted on pancakes and pork.

Grandmother was a sick lady and getting worse every year and nothing was being done about it. She died young, 49 I think, when Ransom her youngest was 12. Thirteen of her 15 children survived her.

At grandmother's request the men made a high swing of two very tall poles. It was put up near the kitchen door and each in his long awaited turn had his breath taking swing all the others in turn running under him. To frighten the girls and grandma, Uncle Will would get Uncle Al to stand in the swing and hold him and Esla and we each in order of his size on the other's shoulders. He would then whistle which was my signal to skin-the-cat and while I did this Esla and he did likewise while all landing again as before. Al was too fat to do it. Meanwhile grandma wailed and wrung her hands and swore at the boys from the kitchen door. For there was a kitchen then and the folks no longer lived in the soddies.

Grandfathers' mail route took him through a Russian settlement where there was an inland P.O. and where grandfather stopped to feed Old Barney and Dick and eat his lunch. At this station the Russian lady without thought of soap or even water alternately made bread and stoked the fire with prairie chips. But they did not ask us to eat with them. They seemed unfriendly and few words were exchanged. Sitting in the big spring seat of the wagon out in the sun grandfather and I ate our baking powder biscuits and brown sugar while Dick and Barney ate their hay and grain from the back of the spring wagon. Grandpa had loaned his fine pocketknife to the Russian and while he was taking the ponies to water the borrower had slipped the knife into his pocket. I told grandpa about it and he thought for some time licking his lips but for some reason, which I thought I understood, he did not ask for the knife. The dark, long haired Russian did not return to our wagon but at length we saw him far out in his field. Grandpa would ask for the knife next trip. Several times upon his return from the route I asked grandpa if he got his knife but he always said he forgot to ask for it. In my inquisitive mind I conjured up all sorts of reasons for grandfather's lack of action in the matter. But I never solved the mystery to my satisfaction.

It was fun to drive the oxen. Once we went for wood in the night. We went to the forest reserve and brought home large trees. All the oxen could haul. We got them because if we hadn't gotten them some one else would have, even if it was against the law.

Uncle Jim told us to catch pigeons which we did one night and he killed 40 for pigeon pie. The others he turned loose. Code was pretty angry because they killed so many. Grandpa often stood in his open-air blacksmith shop working at his forge or mending harness. Sometimes he fed the pigeons and they would perch upon his head and shoulders. He was fond of them and kind to them but not to anything else except Dick and Barney and not always to them.

Aunt Mable, youngest of the girls, had lived some with another family in order to attend school and had ideas. I think she was precocious and her elocution was pretty good. She was buxsom and loud and had good clothes and was going to be a school teacher.

Living was hard out there in Hand Co. Back home and with a father like ours we were better off and more secure. Father sent his folks boxes and money each winter especially at Christmas time.

On our next visit we found them living in an oversized square house bought from a discouraged neighbor and moved in on broad-wheeled trucks which were still in the back yard. Many oxen and horses had been used in moving so large a building. There was little furniture in this house. We kids slept on the floor up stairs with the men. I always slept on Uncle Wills arm. His chewing tobacco breath was dreadful but what could be done about it? By this time I was chewing regularly anyway. Spur Head was the best but sometimes they had only Battle Ax. I could spit clear of the saddle and no one would even see any discoloration of my lips as was so plain to see on Uncle Al. With my feet in the leather above the stirrups and a fair sized chew tucked away in my cheek I would ride pell-mell out to the fields and across long stretches of prairie never once pulling leather yet not so confident as I appeared to be. I even worked up the courage to follow on Old Dan the ever appearing Indian trains as they crossed our country headed eastward, their seasonal migration, Grandpa said, to Pipestone, Minn. I followed them at the safe distance of half a mile or so to see that they didn't shoot another of our sheep. Code was very friendly with many of these Indians. She was always trying to trade them out of their beads and moccasins. Once she traded them a poor scabby little but fat dog which had no friend but her it being a tramp and a mongrel and "afraid even of the old turkey gobbler". I suppose they ate him.

Just what was kindness out there I could not tell. My superabundance of tender, loving kindness seemed at this age to render me entirely unfit for any part in this naturally cruel and unkind picture. How strange it all seemed to me. Not like things at our home. Old Shep, the shaggy black shepherd, brave enough to be known as the best dog in the country and true enough to own the deep affection of the whole family, "smart as a whip" they all said, was an example of what I mean. Shep lost the sight of his left eye. It was done with the blacksnake during a flogging he received at grandfather's feet for his failure to understand orders he could not hear. For gentle, old Shep was deaf. He had just naturally grown deafer and deafer and now was stone deaf. And what had made him deaf? Only the repeated twisting of his ears. And even now they would do that to him. And why did they twist his ears? Believe it or not it was to prove to visitors and over and over to themselves that he would not whine or whimper no matter how much he was hurt. "When you get that much grit, young feller," they said to me "you will be a real man". I wondered if it was so, but pitied and admired Old Shep and defended him all I could even with kicks and blows which to my disappointment only added to the merriment and to the abuse of cowering, unhappy old Shep. Next day I tore out the three iron crowbars used as roasts in one of Code's hen houses a job I had assigned to myself some time before. 

After rain storms infrequent enough to render any kind of crops 
