% Homestead on Deadman Creek  
% Ransom Marion Tone

I was working at the Hensen store, Elk Point, the summer of 1906, after a year at Dakota Wesleyan University, when a letter came from father about a covered claim, a water right 160 acres on Deadman Creek about two miles west of his homestead.  Old Henry Henken was pretty sore when I asked for leave but I promised to hurry back and went to Pierre to see if the quarter section was open for file, which it was.  I filed with out seeing the land and went on to Murdo McKinsie, then the end of the C.M.&St.P.road.

A freight car served a depot at Murdo and there was no town except a few temporary shacks, a large barn, and a store.  How I was to get up to Deadman, about 75 miles the way we went, I had no idea.  The livery barn was full up with horses, freighters, and homesteaders.  I mixed with them and slept there, talking to every one not too busy to listen to me.

A tall, middle-aged man came and slept near me.  We slept in some bales of hay.  He wasn't going anywhere in particular he said just having a look at the country.  It didn't take much persuasion to get hi to go north and to take me along.  He didn't want a deal with me, just wanted company, which was pretty agreeable with me.  About every hour he went out to see if anything had been stolen from his spring wagon.  Finally I suggested that we both go out and sleep in the wagon and we did.  Next day we stocked up with bacon, and bread, and coffee, and lit out.

He made about twenty-five miles a day not wishing to push his ever-fat bays.  He was a great guy, was from Alliance, Nebraska and had a lot of Wild West novels with him and told me with shining eyes the story in each of them as far as he had read them.  We slept each night in the spring wagon and woke each morning with the meadow larks and feeling as fit as they.  We made coffee and fried bacon and eggs twice each day, munching bread and store cookies for lunch.  We camped at the old Philip post office two miles east of the present town of Philip which did not exist then.  He tried again and again to kill a bald eagle to take home.  They were numerous and perched on the tops of stony hills but he always missed, then blamed it on the poor cartridges sold now-a-days.

Then we drove up Deadman and that night I saw my homestead for the first time.  It was the prettiest one hundred and sixty acres of them all, sloping a little and level, the south-west corner cut by Deadman Creek along which a dozen trees, elms and cottonwoods, were growing.  It was pleasant to think I would some day own such a piece of land.  The Nebraska man camped there with me several days.  He seemed to me to be as lazy as Hall's dog and appeared to be thoroughly enjoying this trip away from his farm and family.  He was in no hurry.  Scouting around on foot I found a prover-up(sic) who would sell his shack, which I bought for fourty(sic) dollars, he agreeing to haul the torn down house the three miles for me.  Together we tore it down and moved the lumber that same day; to the great surprise of my Nebraska friend.  No rains came to bother.  It was only seven miles to the Hartzel store and to nails, a saw, and hammer, and rubberwood for the roof.  I cut down some small, straight trees down the creek for additional studs.  This brought a smile and nods of approval from Nebraska.  I even got in the deal, a padlock for the door, a smoke stack, and one window shash(sic).  I think my shack cost the least of any house for miles around.  It was just wide enough that my bed springs, which also came with lot, fit snuggly across the end of the room.  The one four-paned window I had to make permanently immovable.  The boards were rough.  Later I covered the entire shack with black tar paper and lined it rather unevenly with grey(sic) building felt.  It became my home until October of the following year, though during that time I was more away than home.  I think I never loved any home quite so much as that home--when I wasn't at home.

Of course there wasn't a chance to earn anything out there.  I went back to Elk Point and got a job railroading again, for it would take money to live on the homestead even on so plain a diet as was commonly faired on the prairie.  I spent that Christmas as I had spent several others at the Ericson home and I needed to be in such good hands, for I had serious trouble with my appendix and stomach.  Mrs. Ericson was for dieting me half to death on granum(sic) and butter milk and coddled eggs.  Her daughter, Florence then just a slip of a girl, remembering perhaps days when I taught her to fish and sometimes carried her through nettles a long the Sioux River, would smuggle me better things to eat, oatmeal cookies I could never forget.  She was a quiet girl not intentionally wishing to do wrong, but lively-eyed, friendly and compassionate, and never averse to outwitting her mother a little.  Perhaps in the hard circumstances, I owed her my life.  It seemed so.

Through our neighbor at Elk Point, Will Joss, who was a foreman on the new Missouri River bridge then being constructed at Mobridge I secured a pass from Sioux City to Mobridge for myself and six men, bridge carpenters.  I explained to Will that I couldn't accept the job myself but would try to get the crew together and take them as far as Pierre.  I guess that was fair enough.  I had to begin residence on my homestead and remain on it continually for eight months.  It was February and very cold.  At Pierre I turned over the pass and separated company with the men.  My brother Roy was among them.  On foot I crossed the river on the ice in the night and caught a mixed train at Ft. Pierre to the end of the railroad then at Midland.  At Midland I ran onto Charley Murtha formerly of Elk Point whom I hired to take me, along with some lumber coal, provisions to Deadman Creek via the Tucker Smith ranch.  Charley drove three mules.  We had a hard trip, arriving at Tucker Smith's late at night, tired and hungry as wolves, for we walked beside the mules in the deep snow most of the day to keep warm.  I thought Mrs. Smith's fried potatoes and black coffee would probably keep us awake but I never slept better in my life.  There was snow on the bed and ice in my hair when I awoke.  We slept under pretty poor shelter.

That day the February thaw began.  By afternoon a strong Chinook had started the streams rolling.  There were no bridges.  We followed the old Deadwood Trail which in places was half a mile wide, doing our best to keep out of the deep ruts on the hillsides.  Fearful of being caught Charley unloaded quickly and started back.  He earned the thirty dollars I paid him.

I had built a small one room shack in August into which I carried my provisions.  Next day Deadman Creek was roaring and could be heard two miles.  I began building a shed-roof lean-to and set up my stove.  I dug a cellar before laying the floor.  Soon there was no snow.  Days were fairly warm, nights fairly cold.  The Chinook continued.  Jack my youngest brother was small then.  He came over to visit me.

Our prairie fire which scared people for miles around and set plows and gangs of men, women and children working for a day and night was started from ashes Jack removed, to be helpful, from my cook stove.  To make it worse Jack ran for home, two miles away, and I was afraid he would be cut off by the fire.  Barrels of water, old mattresses, ropes, saddle-ponies, plows on the run, everybody swearing at everybody else.  It left a mile wide blackened scar over hills and gullies and ran eastward several miles, and when the green of spring came the scar and crime showed even more.

I cut sod and banked my house wid(sic) and about three feet high making it warmer and cooler, too.  Often I would sit on the sod wall and watch the night come on late of evenings.  The night hawks always zoomed down from the hill out back making loud sounds.  In the starlight I was still sitting there.  On moonlight nights I never took to my bed until exhausted.  It was deadly lonely.  The folks had gone back home in March.

One bright, moonlight night I heard a horse approaching.  There was no thought of fear except that he might pass by.  I went out to meet him.  It was Norm Bryant, a sheepherder I knew.  He had come four miles to say howdy while it was night and he could leave the sheep corralled.  We smoked our pipes and he sang some funny songs.  At about three o'clock he made ready to return to his sheep wagon and I made ready to go with him.  It amused him, my being so lonely.  We tied the horse double and he was willing.  Norm turned out the sheep and we had breakfast.  His dog had run off to the ranch twelve miles above and the sheep knew it.  They went everywhere in all directions and Norm galloped over the hills after them leaving me.  I walked to the inland store and slept with my head on the counter ‘til the mail team came in the gallop.  I visited with Hartzel and out of it he hired me to help in the store and post office.

That day, before accepting the store job, I met Mr. Miller, the owner of Norm Bryant's run of sheep and other bunches, and told him Norm thought I might get a job with him.  He said, "If Bryant recommends you, I don't want you.  I'm going up there now to fire him," and after blowing smoke in my face turned and walked away.  I hollered to him that if he felt that way he ought to at least change his brand of cigars.  He laughed and so did everybody else, and I felt better.  I was waiting to catch a ride back to my cell when Hartzel, more sober than generally, offered me the job helping in the store, I didn't even ask how much and worked a month before anything was said about pay.  Except Saturdays and Sundays they turned the store and post office over to me and I had fun putting things in order.  I even shingled the north side and put up boxes and racks in the post office.  Girls, school-teachers and old maid homesteaders came to the store in bunches.  I met some swell fellows too, and was invited to several parties.  When "Big Alice" came back she relieved me of my job and I had to go back to my shack, seven miles away, and start cooking again.  Then Alice left to be married I guess, and they sent for me.  Was I happy?  Mrs. Hartzel said they paid her sister more for doing nothing than they paid me.  But I said Alice would probably work for less if she was good and lonely and she spiked (sic) it there.  I got the same dollar a day, board and room, room shared with six never shaved and never clean freighters, sheep men, and ranch hands and a steady flow of transcients(sic).

They told wild stories and sang of night in the long poorly lighted bunk-house.  They were friendly but never took me in. I hated whiskey and they loved it, had it all the time ‘til Mrs. Hartzel nearly blew up about it.  When Bert started taking me with him on coyote hunts they began warming up to me.  Bert had six big hounds and he knew how to get the coyotes.  He'd drive to the top of the butte and leave a man there with two dogs behind the rocks, then farther down he'd leave two more dogs held by a second man.  Then he'd drive down into the valley and find a coyote with his spyglass.  The dogs high up usually bit the coyote first.  Coyotes always make for high ground for safety.  It was team work.  He used a bitch and a dog (Old Ring and Lissie) high on the butte.  Few dogs will attack a bitch coyote.  Once we had to pry a coyotes mouth open with a monkey wrench.  He was set to stay, though dead.  Few hounds will attack a coyote singly.  They work in pairs one to throw him, the other to jump him.  A coyote slashes fast but never engages in combat till he is throw(sic).

The Hartzel store building always had many coyotes hides stretched upon it.  One night the dogs to fighting among themselves and next morning "Big Alice's" shepherd was dead and so was Old Ring.  Bert cried like a child when he pulled Old Ring from underneath the store and I liked him a little better after that – when he was sober.

I can feel the prairie now and the saddle under me of a cool evening or early dawn as I rode to and from my homestead periodically to ward off any jumpers.  Sometimes I would sing as I went along and Mrs. Teeters or the Johnson girls would wave or call out to me, as I passed by.  There was one girl out north, whose name I have forgotten, who was very pretty.  Along with Tena Johnson I visited her one day.  After she proved up she sent me cards from Sioux City always ending "Helsing Efra Mea".  She sent one long after, when I was teaching at Vivian and Ruth Minty made much of it.  That girl helped me kill a rattler and I skinned it, having the ratters on and made her a hat band of it.

We hunted snakes just for the fun of it, and killed many.  Tom Culp killed forty-eight one day, but he got them all in one den.  Norm Bryant and I hunted them along the nearly dry creek beds.

All-night parties became the vogue.  Cards and music and singing, sometimes a little whiskey but not often, kept eyes bright even among the older folks.  Sturdy folks, intent on making the most of their eight months, prove-up, idle stay on the homesteads.  Most of the party was carried on outside the small shacks, for as many as forty might come.  There was always plenty of hot coffee, canned cream and sandwiches.  No one thought of going home till breakfast had been served and daylight was showing over the hills.  At some of the older and larger ranch houses we danced all night, while the babies and children slept, three on a bed in the quiter(sic) rooms.  In all of it I never saw a fight nor heard even a hot argument.  No lady ever smoked and no man was with out his pipe.  Everybody walked, some several miles.  There were few horses in the country.  There were no roads home for there were no roads.  When the party disintegrated like spokes in a wheel the paths of each individual or pair or company lead all to their tiny shack-homes over the hills.  All knew where and when they would meet again and no one would fail to be there.

I think of all the folks I knew in those days Chan Allard was my favorite.  He was a sheep herder.  "Pleasant and also profitable," he said when I asked him one morning at breakfast in his wagon how come a fellow like him herded sheep.  I slept in his wagon several nights so he could go over east to his homestead.  He was about forty, had curly brown hair, was highly informed, a college graduate, and of all things, a graduate after that of a conservatory of music.  "That's an axiom," he would say and again, "The circle beats the square, my friend."  Strange enough that he was there and stranger that such a one would tell me in detail all about her and him.  Maybe it was the lonely prairie.  He talked of her as gently and sincerely as though I had been his brother or her brother.  Her name was Carrol.  She sang, he played.  She was so much above other girls, sweet and kind and beautiful, too generous ever to hurt anyone.  "Fifteen years?  It was only yesterday."  I asked him no questions, because I knew that at such times I was only one of the hills or his dog.  He had to be telling it.  I wondered if he told it to Bert, but decided definitely against such a thought.  A week-end at Pierre with Bert and he'd be alright if he got home.  Once he fell off his horse and broke his collarbone.  Bert was no fit company for Chan.

A strange fellow came into the store one afternoon.  He had little to say except that he had walked it from Philip, twelve miles, and was plenty tired, also pretty hungry.  I opened a can of salmon and brought bread and cookies from the kitchen.  He ate ravenously and much, and then said he was sorry but he had no money was looking for work, was on his way to the Ladgin ranch, would pay later.  I put him on the next rig going west and heard no more of him for a month when he came riding back with the Teeter's boys.  He was on his way out and wanted to pay what he owed the store.  "But I'll be back." he said.  Some day I'll be back.  Joe Ladgin didn't pay me what he agreed to.  I've got to come back.  You can count on that.  I'll get even.  I'll sure as hell meet that lousy Frenchman again.  I'll blow him to hell."  I said as little as possible, for he was unbalanced.  That was plain enough.  But he talked loud and made some wild statements and with such malice and force that I believed he meant violence to Old Joe, sure enough.  I couldn't get the fellow out of my mind.
